
A valoren number is an identification number assigned to financial instruments in Switzerland. These numbers are similar to the CUSIP numbers that are used in Canada and the U.S. A typical valoren number is between six to nine digits in length.
 
A valoren number is a numeric code that intrinsically has no meaning. When a new valoren is needed, the next one from the list is simply allocated. An instrument's number indicates nothing about the instrument itself. Market data firms and other financial institutions throughout Europe typically refer to Swiss companies and/or store trade data on these companies using valoren numbers as a means of security identification. Unlike ISINs or CUSIPs, valoren numbers have no data implanted in the numbers.
 
SIX Financial Information is the official securities numbering agency in Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Belgium, and in this capacity is responsible for the issuance of Valor and ISIN identifiers.
 
A valoren number can be used for a number of purposes in identifying a financial instrument:
 
Swiss Valoren numbers are issued by SIX Financial Infomation, a subsidiary of SIX Group, a multinational financial data vendor based in Zurich, Switzerland, with offices in 23 countries. The company provides market data, which it gathers from the world's major trading venues directly and in real-time. Its database has structured and encoded securities administration data for more than 20 million financial instruments. The firm has offices in 23 countries.
 
SIX Financial Information was originally known as Telekurs. In 1996, the firm was restructured into a holding company, and launched an expansion of its product range. In 2007, Telekurs acquired part of the Fininfo Group. In 2008, The Telekurs Group merged with SWX Group, SIS Swiss Financial Services Group and SEGA Intersettle to form SIX Group. Telekurs Financial was renamed to SIX Telekurs and became the Financial Information division of SIX Group. On April 23, 2012, use of the "Telekurs" name was phased out.
