
A variable annuity is a type of annuity contract, the value of which can vary based on the performance of an underlying portfolio of mutual funds. Variable annuities differ from fixed annuities, which provide a specific and guaranteed return.
 
There are two elements that contribute to the value of a variable annuity: the principal, which is the amount of money you pay into the annuity, and the returns that your annuity’s underlying investments deliver on that principal over the course of time.﻿﻿
 
The most popular type of variable annuity is a deferred annuity. Often used for retirement planning purposes, it is meant to provide a regular (monthly, quarterly, annual) income stream, starting at some point in the future. There are also immediate annuities, which begin paying income right away.
 
You can buy an annuity with either a lump sum or a series of payments, and the account’s value will grow accordingly. In the case of deferred annuities, this is often referred to as the accumulation phase. The second phase is triggered when the annuity owner asks the insurer to start the flow of income, often referred to as the payout phase. Most annuities will not allow you to withdraw additional funds from the account once the payout phase has begun.﻿﻿
 
Variable annuities should be considered long-term investments, due to the limitations on withdrawals. Typically, they allow one withdrawal each year during the accumulation phase. However, if you take a withdrawal during the contract’s surrender period, which can be as long as 15 years, you’ll generally have to pay a surrender fee.﻿﻿
 
Variable annuities were introduced in the 1950s as an alternative to fixed annuities, which offer a guaranteed—but often low—return. Variable annuities gave buyers a chance to benefit from rising markets by investing in a menu of mutual funds offered by the insurer. The upside was the possibility of higher returns during the accumulation phase and a larger income during the payout phase. The downside was that the buyer was exposed to market risk, which could result in losses. With a fixed annuity, by contrast, the insurance company assumes the risk of delivering whatever return it has promised.
 
In deciding whether to put money into a variable annuity versus some other type of investment, it’s worth weighing these pros and cons:
 Tax-deferred growth Income stream tailored to your needs Guaranteed death benefit Funds off-limits to creditors Riskier than fixed annuities Surrender fees and penalties for early withdrawal High fees 
Below are some details for each side.
 
Before buying a variable annuity, investors should carefully read the prospectus to try to understand the expenses, risks, and formulas for calculating investment gains or losses.﻿﻿ Annuities are complicated products, so that may be easier said than done.
 
Bear in mind that between the numerous fees—such as investment management fees, mortality fees, and administrative fees—and charges for any additional riders, a variable annuity’s expenses can quickly add up. That can adversely affect your returns over the long term, compared with other types of investments.
 Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know." Page 3. Accessed June 17, 2020. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know." Pages 6 and 7. Accessed June 17, 2020. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know." Page 10. Accessed June 17, 2020. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know." Page 1. Accessed June 17, 2020.