
Founded at the height of the Great Depression, in 1930, the Veterans Administration was formerly an independent government agency. It is today called Veteran's Affairs and became U.S. Cabinet level in 1989 with the title Department of Veterans Affairs. Commonly referred to as "the VA," the organization provides patient care, benefits, and essential services to veterans of the U.S. armed forces and their families.
 
The former Veterans Administration, or VA, was known to be a reliable provider of home loans for qualified applicants. That reputation still holds of the current Department of Veterans Affairs. To be eligible for a VA-guaranteed home loan, veterans must have served on active duty in the Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, or Marines.
 
The specific service requirements will vary, depending on the time period during which a veteran served. A certificate of eligibility is required to obtain a VA loan, and the loan can be obtained through any mortgage lender who participates in the VA home loan program. The VA-guaranteed home loan is one of very few 0% down payment loans available in the United States (the USDA Rural Housing Loan is another).
 
The VA also provides veterans with disability compensation for those injured or contracted a disease while serving. The department serves a number of other functions designed to help veterans and their families:
 
Within the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs lies the Veteran's Health Administration (VHA), which is the largest integrated health care system in the United States. It includes 1,255 health care facilities: 170 VA medical centers and 1,074 outpatient sites. VHA serves more than 9 million veterans enrolled in the VA health care program.
 
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs also runs 140 national cemeteries throughout the United States and Puerto Rico, providing benefits for all eligible service members and family members. Burial and memorial benefits include opening and closing of the grave, perpetual care, a burial flag, a headstone/marker, and a presidential memorial certificate.
 
The VA also makes available a variety of benefits and services that provide financial assistance and other forms of help to service members, their dependents, and survivors. The list includes compensation, education and training, life insurance, vocational rehabilitation, and job placement assistance.
 
Veterans who were dishonorably discharged, as well as the imprisoned and parolees, may not be eligible for VA benefits, and benefits are not available to those with outstanding felony warrants.
