
The VINX 30 is a stock index that tracks the 30 largest companies with the most heavily-traded stocks on the Nordic stock exchanges. The VINX 30 is denominated in euros and is an adjustable free-floating index. It tracks stocks that trade on the exchanges in Helsinki, Copenhagen, and Stockholm.
 
The VINX 30, launched in 2006, acts as a benchmark for investors who wish to track their Nordic investments against a similar index. There is also an ETF called the XACT Nordic 30 that owns the 30 stocks in this index. Investors who want to follow the returns of the index can do so by investing in this fund.
 
As of May 2018, the following companies, followed by their exchange, were in the index, according to Nasdaq: 
 
ABB Ltd  -  SEK    ASSA ABLOY B  -  SEK  Atlas Copco A  -  SEK    Carlsberg B  -  DKK    Coloplast B  -  DKK    Danske Bank  -  DKK    Ericsson B  -  SEK    Essity B  -  SEK    Fortum Oyj  -  EUR    Genmab  -  DKK    Hennes & Mauritz B  -  SEK    Investor B  -  SEK    KONE Oyj  -  EUR    A.P. Møller - Mærsk B  -  DKK    Nordea Bank  -  SEK    Nokia Oyj  -  EUR    Novo Nordisk B  -  DKK    Pandora  -  DKK  Sampo Oyj A  -  EUR    Sandvik  -  SEK    SEB A  -  SEK  Sv. Handelsbanken A  -  SEK  Swedbank A  -  SEK    Telia Company  -  SEK    UPM-Kymmene Oyj  -  EUR  Volvo B  -  SEK    Vestas Wind Systems  -  DKK
 
Other indexes for the region include OMX Copenhagen 25 Index, OMX Helsinki 25, OMX Iceland 8, OMX Nordic 40, and OMX Stockholm 30 Index.
 
An index is an indicator or measure of something, and in finance, it typically refers to a statistical measure of change in a securities market. In the case of financial markets, stock and bond market indices consist of a hypothetical portfolio of securities representing a particular market or a segment of it. (You cannot invest directly in an index.) The S&P 500 and the US Aggregate Bond Index are common benchmarks for the American stock and bond markets, respectively.
 
Each index related to the stock and bond markets has its own calculation methodology. In most cases, the relative change of an index is more important than the actual numeric value representing the index. For example, if the Financial Times Stock Exchange (FTSE) 100 is at 6,670.40, that number tells investors the index is nearly seven times its base level of 1,000. However, to assess how the index has changed from the previous day, investors must look at the amount the index has fallen or risen, often expressed as a percentage.
