
Quantified self is the act of using personal data to improve one’s quality of life. This usually refers to healthcare but the practice can extend beyond that metric.
 
The term "quantified self" was made popular in 2007 by the writer Gary Wolf. The practice of tracking the details of a person’s day-to-day life to find patterns or to determine causation has increased in popularity since then. Originally, Wolf used the term to describe the intersection of data and self-improvement. With the rise and accessibility of online applications that can track everything from calories to the number of steps taken in one day, people now have more information at their fingertips than ever. There has even been a rise in wearable technology, such as smart watches that can track many personal details, like a runner’s pulse rate or how often someone slips into Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep.
 
The result of this growing movement is that people are more aware of their personal health than ever. There is also a rise in connections between collected data and the impact it has on the body. For example, smartphones that have applications that can track how many steps you take each day can also count your calorie intake and expenditure. This can allow the average person an easier method of monitoring their weight loss journey and the ability to personally tailor their daily goals based on desired results.
 
Personal data gathering is not new; after all, any one with a notepad and a pencil can keep track of their daily calorie intake, for example. However, the ability to pair it with technology in order to gain a real-time calculation of how many calories a person burns per day, for example, was novel at the time that Wolf coined this phrase.
 
An individual may also track their heart rate, blood pressure, mood, number of minutes that they exercised, and their maximum heart rate over the previous 24 hours, among many other common forms of personal data.
 
In terms of wearable technologies, like fitness trackers, the information they provide can sometimes be lifesaving. Some doctor’s offices and hospitals are now reviewing information provided by these devices to detect changes in pulse rates over longer periods of time to determine if there is a correlation between that and excessive activity that may be indicative of a bigger problem.
 
Wearable technology—also called wearable tech—is any technology that can be fastened to your body. More specifically, wearable technology refers to devices which are used to monitor actives or track and compile information. A fitness tracker which monitors your pulse rate would be considered wearable technology, but a phone that fits into a holster case on a belt would not generally be considered wearable technology, according to this definition.
