
A safe haven is an investment that is expected to retain or increase in value during times of market turbulence. Safe havens are sought by investors to limit their exposure to losses in the event of market downturns. However, what assets are actually safe havens can vary depending on the particular down market. That means in order for an investment to act as a safe haven, investors must perform ample due diligence.
 
A safe haven investment diversifies an investor’s portfolio and is beneficial in times of market volatility. Most times, when the market rises or falls, it is for a short period of time. However, there are times, such as during an economic recession, when the downturn of the market is prolonged. When the market is in turmoil, the market value of most investments falls steeply.
 
While such systemic events in the market are unavoidable, some investors look to buy safe haven assets that are uncorrelated or negatively correlated to the general market during times of distress. While most assets are falling in value, safe havens either retain or increase in value.
 
There are a number of investment securities that are considered to be safe havens. Some of them include:
 
Some currencies are considered safe havens compared to others. In volatile markets, investors and currency traders may seek to convert holdings of cash into these currencies for protection. The Swiss franc is considered a safe haven currency. Given the stability of the Swiss government and its financial system, the Swiss franc usually faces a strong upward pressure stemming from increased foreign demand. Switzerland has a large, safe, and stable banking industry, low-volatility capital market, virtually no unemployment, high standard of living, and positive trade balance figures. The country’s independence from the European Union also makes it somewhat immune to any negative political and economic events that occur in the region. Incidentally, Switzerland is also a tax haven for the wealthy, who take advantage of the country’s high-security and anonymous banking features to evade taxes and hide ill-gotten funds.﻿﻿
 
In addition to the Swiss franc - and depending on the particular challenge the market is facing - the euro, the Japanese yen and the U.S. dollar are also considered safe havens. Often the U.S. dollar is a default safe haven for companies facing any domestic currency uncertainty due to the fact that it is the world's reserve currency and the denomination for many international business deals.
 
The assets listed above are not guaranteed to maintain their values during periods of market volatility. Furthermore, what constitutes a safe haven changes over time. For example, if an entire economic sector is performing poorly but one company within that sector is performing well, its stock could be considered a safe haven. Investors should carry out due diligence when looking to invest in safe havens, as an asset that is considered a safe haven in a downturn may not necessarily be a good investment when the stock markets are rising.
 TreasuryDirect. "Treasury Bills." Accessed Sept. 11, 2020. Ideas. "The historical origins of the safe haven status of the Swiss franc." Accessed Sept. 11, 2020.