
The Series 7 exam licenses the holder to sell all types of securities products except commodities and futures. Known formally as the General Securities Representative Qualification Examination, the Series 7 exam and its licensing is administered by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA).﻿﻿
 
Stockbrokers in the United States need to pass the Series 7 exam to obtain a license to trade. The Series 7 exam focuses on investment risk, taxation, equity, and debt instruments; packaged securities, options, retirement plans, and interactions with clients for prospective securities industry professionals.﻿﻿ This introductory-level exam assesses a candidate’s knowledge of basic securities industry information including concepts fundamental to working in the industry.﻿﻿
 
The purpose of the Series 7 license is to set a level of competency for a registered representative or stockbroker to work in the securities industry. The Series 7 license is an essential requirement for an entry-level broker. The licensing exam covers an extensive range of financial terms and topics as well as securities regulations.﻿﻿
 
Candidates who pass the Series 7 exam can trade many securities, such as stocks, mutual funds, options, municipal securities, and variable contracts. The Series 7 license does not cover selling real estate or life insurance products.﻿﻿ In addition to obtaining the Series 7 license, many states require that registered representatives pass the Series 63 exam, also called the Uniform Securities Agent State Law Exam.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Since October 1, 2018, Series 7 candidates are required to take the Securities Industry Essentials (SIE) exam before sitting for the Series 7.﻿﻿ According to FINRA, the SIE is an introductory-level exam that "assesses a candidate’s knowledge of basic securities industry information including concepts fundamental to working in the industry, such as types of products and their risks; the structure of the securities industry markets, regulatory agencies and their functions; and prohibited practices." If you need more information on the SIE, FINRA's SIE exam content outline provides more details.﻿﻿
 
Candidates who want to take the Series 7 exam must be sponsored by a FINRA member firm, and FINRA has other Series 7 eligibility requirements. The firm must file a Form U4 (Uniform Application for Securities Industry Registration or Transfer) for the candidate to be registered for the licensing exam.﻿﻿ FINRA governs the activities of securities firms and registered brokers, ensuring that anyone who sells securities products is qualified and tested.﻿﻿
 Candidates who want to take the Series 7 exam must be sponsored by a FINRA member firm, and FINRA has other Series 7 eligibility requirements.﻿﻿ 
The Series 7 is structured as follows:
 
The Series 7 exam has 125 multiple choice questions, lasts 225 minutes, and cost $245. The passing score is 72%.﻿﻿
 
Prior to Oct. 1, 2018, the Series 7 exam contained 250 questions covering five major job functions.﻿﻿ The exam duration was six hours, had no prerequisites, and cost $305. A score of 72% was required to pass.
 
FINRA does not provide candidates with any physical certificate as proof of exam completion. Current or potential employers who wish to view proof of completion must access this information through FINRA's Central Registration Depository (CRD).﻿﻿
 
Completion of the Series 7 exam is a prerequisite for many other securities licenses, such as the Series 24, which permits the candidate to supervise and manage broker activities.﻿﻿
 FINRA. ”Series 7 – General Securities Representative Exam.” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”General Securities Representative Qualification Examination (Series 7) Content Outline,” Page 6. Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”Series 63 – Uniform Securities Agent State Law Exam.” Accessed August 19, 2020. North American Securities Administration Association. ”EXAM FAQS.” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”FINRA Launches New SIE Exam to Streamline Examination Process for Prospective Candidates Entering the Securities Industry.” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”Securities Industry Essentials® (SIE®) Exam.” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”Register a New Candidate.” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”Exam Restructuring.” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”Central Registration Depository (CRD).” Accessed August 19, 2020. FINRA. ”Series 24 – General Securities Principal Exam.” Accessed August 19, 2020.