
The Series 63 is a securities exam and license entitling the holder to solicit orders for any type of security in a particular state. To obtain a Series 63 license, the applicant must pass an exam and possess knowledge of ethical practices and fiduciary obligations.
 
As of Dec. 2018, the North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA), which creates the Series 63 exam, had updated its questions in light of recent changes to the tax code. Questions based on the 2018 tax code were phased out in January 2019. Questions for the Series 65 and Series 66 exams were also updated.
 
The Series 63 (formally known as the Uniform Securities Agent State Law Examination) is a registered exam that is required of all potential registered representatives in most of the U.S. states. However, Colorado, District of Columbia, Florida, Louisiana, Maryland, Ohio, and Puerto Rico do not require the Series 63.
 
The exam was developed to qualify candidates who want to work in the securities industry within a state and to sell investment products, such as mutual funds, variable annuities, and unit investment trusts. The exam covers the principles of state securities regulations. Each state has its own securities regulations, called blue-sky laws, which were developed to regulate the sale of securities.
 Agents must acquire the Series 63 license, in addition to a Series 7 or Series 6 license, to sell securities. 
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) administers the Series 63 exam. There are 60 multiple-choice questions on the exam. The passing score is 72% or 43 of the 60 questions. The candidate must complete the exam within the allotted time of 75 minutes. As of March 2020, it costs $135 to take the exam.
 
The North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) developed the exam along with representatives of the securities industry. Candidates for the exam need to be familiar with the Uniform Securities Act of 1956 and the NASAA Statement of Policy and Model Rules. The Series 63 is an entry-level exam; there are no prerequisites for the exam after completing the Form U-10.
 
The Series 63 exam covers the principles of state securities regulations and rules prohibiting dishonest or unethical practices. Some 45% of the questions pertain to regulations, 10% to administrative provisions, 20% to customer communication, and 25% to ethical practices and business obligations.
 
The topics on the exam include registration of various persons and securities, and fiduciary responsibility with client funds and securities. For more, see NASSA's Test Specifications.
 
Successfully completing the Securities Industry Essentials Exam (SIE) is required to be eligible to take the Series 7 and Series 6 license exams, but not the 63. To sell securities, broker-dealers must obtain the Series 63 license as well as the Series 7 or Series 6.
