
One of the world's top graduate business schools, INSEAD, has campuses in France, Singapore and the Middle East, and a research center in Israel. Founded in 1957, INSEAD was originally known as "Institut Européen d'Administration des Affaires."
 
Today, INSEAD is recognized around the world as one of the top business schools on the planet. The school has more than 150 faculty members, with enrollment reaching as high as 1,400 students in its various degree programs each year.
 
INSEAD was established in 1957, when the Paris Chamber of Commerce decided to start a European business school. Two years later, it took in its first MBA students. In 1960, 52 students from 14 different countries graduated from the school's MBA program. In 1968, INSEAD began offering its executive program for the first time. The school's Ph.D. program was launched in 1989.
 
The school opened its Asian campus in Singapore in 2000 and its Middle East campus in Abu Dhabi in 2007. In 2006, the school opened a research center in Israel.
 
The school's main campus in France is located in Fontainebleau near Paris. The second campus, located in Asia, is in Singapore in the Buona Vista district, 15 minutes from the financial district. The third campus, in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, was inaugurated in June 2010.
 
INSEAD offers a variety of graduate and doctoral programs.
 
A one-year, fully-accelerated term of study with intake in September and January. Students are required to take core subjects including finance, economics, accounting, ethics and marketing, as well as electives from a pool of 75 different course offerings. Roughly 90% of graduates were employed in their field three months after graduation.
 
This program is offered at the school's three campuses for experienced executives. An intensive 14- to 17-month modular program, it includes group coaching, team activities and 360-degree assessments. The 2019 class has 235 students, each with an average of 14 years of work experience.
 
This program spans 18 months with eight modules that last three to four days each. Students focus on human behavior and organizational dynamics. The objectives of the program include learning how to increase self-awareness, becoming an effective agent for organizational change, learning new coaching methodologies, and getting a better understanding of organizational behavior. The class of 2020 has 106 participants across the three campuses.
 
This program is for working professionals and lasts 18 months. Intake is in the Europe and Asia campuses. The program consists of six modules that last two weeks each, taking place three to four months apart. The class of 2020 has 34 participants who had an average of ten years of work experience.
 
This program comes as a result of a partnership between INSEAD and Tsinghua, a university based in Beijing. Students can pursue this degree at the three INSEAD campuses or at Tsinghua.
 
A five-year program that prepares students who wish to work in academia in business. The first two years are dedicated to course study, while the remaining three are intended for research and dissertation work. Intake happens in Europe or Asia, with an exchange through the Wharton School in the United States.
 
The program has a maximum of 18 open places each year. Collaboration is encouraged between different academic areas to offer more depth for research. Students are given lucrative financial support which includes scholarships and living allowances.
 
INSEAD also offers a certificate in business foundations. The INSEAD-Sorbonne Unviersité Certificate Programme is aimed at recent master and doctoral graduates who study over a four-month period.
