
An International Securities Identification Number (ISIN) is a code that uniquely identifies a specific securities issue. The organization that allocates ISINs in any particular country is the country's respective National Numbering Agency (NNA).
 
An ISIN is often confused with a ticker symbol, which identifies the stock at the exchange level. For example, according to ISIN Organization, IBM common stock is traded on close to 25 trading exchanges and platforms, and its stock has a different ticker symbol depending on where it is traded. However, IBM stock has only one ISIN for each security.﻿﻿ The ISIN code identifies the securities, but it is the only common securities identification number that is universally recognized. ISINs are used for numerous reasons including clearing and settlement.
 
All internationally traded securities issuers are urged to use the ISIN numbering scheme, which is now the accepted standard by virtually all countries. The United States and Canada primarily use a similar scheme known as a CUSIP number.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
ISIN codes have a total of 12 characters consisting of both letters and numbers. These include the country in which the issuing company is headquartered (first two digits), along with a number specific to the security (middle nine digits), and a final character, which acts as a check. An example of an ISIN number for a US company’s stock certificate could look like this: US-000402625-0 (dashes incorporated for simplicity). On the other hand, a theoretical Namibian company could have an ISIN, which appears as NA-000K0VF05-4. The middle nine digits of the ISIN are computer-generated in a complex formula. These are critical in helping protect against counterfeiting and forgery.
 An ISIN should not be confused with a ticker symbol, which identifies stock at the exchange level. A company's securities could have more than one ticker symbol depending on the trading platform, but the securities will have only one ISIN. 
Universal acceptance of ISIN allows global straight-through processing (GSTP), which is the electronic handling of the trade clearing and settlement. ISINs are used to track holdings of institutional investors in a format that is consistent across markets worldwide.
 
ISINs were first used in 1981 but were not widely accepted until 1989 when the G30 countries recommended their adoption.﻿﻿ A year later they were endorsed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). In 1994, the Global ISIN Access Mechanism was created to electronically exchange ISIN information across regions through a digital information exchange process called GIAM-2.
 
The relevant National Numbering Agency (NNA) in each country issues ISINs. In the United States, this is the CUSIP Service Bureau. Established in 1964, the CUSIP Service Bureau was created to improve country-wide standards for the financial services industry.﻿﻿
 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 6166 currently defines an ISIN’s structure.﻿﻿ Currently, an ISIN can be assigned to most forms of securities including (but not limited to) equity shares; units and/or depositary receipts; debt instruments including bonds; commercial paper; stripped coupons and principal amounts; T-bills; rights and warrants; derivatives; commodities; and currencies.
 The ISIN Organization. "ISIN." Accessed Sept. 28, 2020. ISIN. "About CUSIP." Accessed Sept. 28, 2020. CUSIP Global Services. "Inside the CGS Identification System," Page 2. Accessed Sept. 28, 2020. ISIN. "History of ISIN Number Codes." Accessed Sept. 28, 2020. CUSIP Global Services. "What Are the Trusted Originator of Quality Identifiers and Descriptive Data." Accessed Sept. 28, 2020. ISIN. "ISO 6166." Accessed Sept. 28, 2020.