
A cash advance is a short-term loan from a bank or an alternative lender. The term also refers to a service provided by many credit card issuers allowing cardholders to withdraw a certain amount of cash. Cash advances generally feature steep interest rates and fees, but they are attractive to borrowers because they also feature fast approval and quick funding.
 
There are a variety of cash advances, but the common denominators among all of them are the stiff interest rates and fees.
 
The most popular type of cash advance is borrowing on a line of credit through a credit card. The money can be withdrawn at an ATM or, depending on the credit card company, from a check that is deposited or cashed at a bank. Credit card cash advances typically carry a high-interest rate, even higher than the rate on regular purchases: You’ll pay an average of 24% – about 9% higher than the average APR for purchases. What’s more, the interest begins to accrue immediately; there is no grace period.
 
These cash advances usually include a fee as well, either a flat rate or a percentage of the advanced amount. Additionally, if you use an ATM to access the cash, you often are charged a small usage fee.
 
Along with separate interest rates, credit card cash advances carry a separate balance from credit purchases, but the monthly payment can be applied to both balances. However, if you are only paying the minimum amount due, the card issuer is allowed by federal law to apply it to the balance with the lower interest rate. As that is invariably the rate for purchases, the cash advance balance can sit and accrue interest at that high rate for months.
 
In most cases, credit card cash advances do not qualify for no- or low-interest-rate introductory offers. On the plus side, they are quick and easy to obtain.
 
Merchant cash advances refer to loans received by companies or merchants from banks or alternative lenders. Typically, businesses with less-than-perfect credit use cash advances to finance their activities, and in some cases, these advances are paid for with future credit card receipts or with a portion of the funds the business receives from sales in its online account. Rather than using a business’ credit score, alternative lenders often survey its creditworthiness by looking at multiple data points, including how much money the merchant receives through online accounts such as PayPal.
 
In consumer lending, the phrase “cash advance” can also refer to payday loans. Issued by special payday lenders, loans can range anywhere from $50 to $1,000, but they come with fees (around $15 per $100 borrowed – or even more in some cases) and interest rates exceeding 100%. Rather than taking into account the borrower’s credit score, the lender determines the amount of the loan based on local state regulations and the size of the applicant’s paycheck. If the loan is approved, the lender hands the borrower cash; if the transaction takes place online, the lender makes an electronic deposit to the borrower’s checking or savings account.
 
The loans are extremely short term – they must be paid back on the borrower’s next payday unless he or she wishes to extend the loan, and in that case, additional interest is charged. Unfortunately, many do: More than 80% of all payday loans are rolled over within 30 days of the previous loan, according to a 2016 study by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
 
The process can be quick, if more complex, than securing a credit card cash advance. To obtain a payday loan, you write a postdated check made out to the payday lender for the amount you plan to borrow, including the fees. The lender immediately issues the borrowed amount but waits to cash your check until the payday arrives. Some electronically minded lenders now have borrowers sign an agreement for automatic repayment from their bank accounts. Lenders usually ask that you provide personal identification and proof of income when you apply.
 
Some employers offer payday loans or advances on paychecks as a service to their employees. Terms vary, but often no fees or interest are charged.
 A cash advance can be helpful to someone who needs cash fast and has a solid plan for paying it back quickly. But cash advances can be disastrous if the borrower is about to declare bankruptcy, needs to pay off a credit card or other bills that have interest rates, or just wants the money to buy more products. 
Taking out a cash advance has no direct impact on your credit or credit score, but it can affect it indirectly in various ways.
 
First, if you take the advance using a credit card, it will raise your outstanding balance, which will raise your credit utilization ratio, a measure that credit scoring models use to calculate your score. If you owe $500 on a $1,500 limit card, for example, your credit utilization ratio is 30%. However, if you take out a $300 cash advance on that card, the balance will jump to $800, resulting in a credit utilization of more than 53%. High utilization rates are a big indicator of credit risk; when your ratio exceeds 40%, it can adversely impact your credit score.
 
As noted earlier, a cash advance usually has a high-interest rate. If this affects your ability to pay the monthly charges promptly, that also could affect your credit score. And if the cash advance puts you over the card’s credit limit, your credit score can be dinged. Even after the balance is paid down, your credit report will show the highest balance reported, and other potential lenders will see that you were over the limit at one point, which could hurt your ability to get new credit.
 
A credit card cash advance could be a reasonable option for someone who has an emergency need for money and limited resources for getting it, especially when that person has a clear and reasonable plan for paying back the money in a short period. It is, for example, a better option than a payday loan or a car title loan, due to the exorbitant triple-digit interest rates those loans typically carry and the greater payoff flexibility that comes with credit card debt.
 
But cash advances would be a bad idea under these conditions:
 
Cash advances aren’t alarming when used infrequently, but they are at best short-term solutions to meet emergencies. If they are becoming a habit, or if you find you regularly need a cash advance to make ends meet, then drastic budgeting and spending changes are in order.
