
A covered call refers to a financial transaction in which the investor selling call options owns an equivalent amount of the underlying security. To execute this an investor holding a long position in an asset then writes (sells) call options on that same asset to generate an income stream. The investor's long position in the asset is the "cover" because it means the seller can deliver the shares if the buyer of the call option chooses to exercise. If the investor simultaneously buys stock and writes call options against that stock position, it is known as a "buy-write" transaction.
 
Covered calls are a neutral strategy, meaning the investor only expects a minor increase or decrease in the underlying stock price for the life of the written call option. This strategy is often employed when an investor has a short-term neutral view on the asset and for this reason holds the asset long and simultaneously has a short position via the option to generate income from the option premium.
 
Simply put, if an investor intends to hold the underlying stock for a long time but does not expect an appreciable price increase in the near term then they can generate income (premiums) for their account while they wait out the lull.
 
A covered call serves as a short-term hedge on a long stock position and allows investors to earn income via the premium received for writing the option. However, the investor forfeits stock gains if the price moves above the option's strike price. They are also obligated to provide 100 shares at the strike price (for each contract written) if the buyer chooses to exercise the option.
 
A covered call strategy is not useful for a very bullish nor a very bearish investor. If an investor is very bullish, they are typically better off not writing the option and just holding the stock. The option caps the profit on the stock, which could reduce the overall profit of the trade if the stock price spikes. Similarly, if an investor is very bearish, they may be better off simply selling the stock, since the premium received for writing a call option will do little to offset the loss on the stock if the stock plummets.
 
The maximum profit of a covered call is equivalent to the strike price of the short call option, less the purchase price of the underlying stock, plus the premium received.
 
The maximum loss is equivalent to the purchase price of the underlying stock less the premium received.
 
An investor owns shares of hypothetical company TSJ. They like its long-term prospects as well as its share price but feel in the shorter term the stock will likely trade relatively flat, perhaps within a couple dollars of its current price of $25.
 
If they sell a call option on TSJ with a strike price of $27, they earn the premium from the option sale but, for the duration of the option, cap their upside on the stock to $27. Assume the premium they receive for writing a three-month call option is $0.75 ($75 per contract or 100 shares).
 
One of two scenarios will play out:
