
Cum laude is Latin for "with praise" or "with honor" and represents an academic level of achievement. Educational institutions use the phrase to signify an academic degree that was awarded with honor.
 
Cum laude is one of three commonly used types of Latin honors recognized in the United States, the other two being summa cum laude and magna cum laude. The terms come from Latin, so they often are called Latin honors. They are common in the United States, but very few countries around the world use them.
 
While cum laude signifies a distinguished level of academic achievement, an even higher distinction is magna cum laude, which means "with high honor" or "with high praise." Summa cum laude bestows the highest honor or praise on its recipient. 
 
The guidelines by which each level of academic honor is achieved differ at academic institutions. Each university or college typically outlines its own expectations for each honor.
 
The criteria for earning Latin honors may include grade-point average (GPA), class ranking, the number of credit hours completed, and other academic achievements.
 
Students receiving Latin honors are typically recognized during graduation ceremonies, and the designation appears on the student's diploma. Students graduating with honors also may be allowed to wear some sort of special insignia at graduation.
 The cum laude designation appears on the student's diploma. 
Some universities bestow Latin honors at certain GPA levels. Typically, a GPA of 3.5 or higher is required to receive the cum laude designation, with higher GPAs required for magna cum laude and summa cum laude. The designation is based only an individual student's final GPA.
 
Other universities reserve Latin honors for a stated percentage of each graduating class. That means only a top percentage of a class may receive any honors and smaller percentages may receive the magna cum laude and summa cum laude honors designations. At Ivy League universities and other highly competitive schools, GPA alone may not be enough to earn these honors. Faculty committees also consider students' academic records and achievements and may recommend honors for exceptional students.
