
Backflush costing is a product costing system generally used in a just-in-time (JIT) inventory environment. In short, it is an accounting method that records the costs associated with producing a good or service only after they are produced, completed, or sold.
 
“Flushing” costs to the end of the production run eliminates the detailed tracking of expenses, such as raw material and labor costs, throughout the manufacturing process, which is a feature of traditional costing systems. Backflush costing is also commonly referred to as backflush accounting.
 
The total costs of a production run are recorded all at once, at the end of the process. Companies using backflush costing, therefore, primarily work backward, calculating the costs of products after they're sold, finished, or shipped. To do this, businesses assign standard charges to the goods they produce. Sometimes costs differ, so companies eventually need to recognize the variances in standard costs and actual costs.
 
Usually, the costs of products are calculated during various stages of the production cycle. By eliminating work-in-process (WIP) accounts, backflush costing is designed to simplify the accounting process and save businesses money.
 
In theory, backflushing appears to be a sensible way to avoid the many complexities associated with assigning costs to products and inventory. Not logging costs during the various production stages enable companies to save time and reduce their expenses. Companies looking for ways to reduce their bottom lines may use backflush costing, but it isn't always an easy accounting method to implement.
 The process of backflush costing makes it difficult for companies to audit because it doesn't always adhere to the basic fundamentals of accounting.  
However, backflushing can also be challenging to implement and is not an option available to all companies. Moreover, there are some other big caveats: businesses that do backflush costing lack a sequential audit trail and may not always conform to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). 
 
Companies using backflush costing generally meet the following three conditions:
