
A basket trade is an order to buy or sell a group of securities simultaneously. Basket trading is essential for institutional investors and investment funds who wish to hold a large number of securities in certain proportions. As cash moves in and out of the fund, large baskets of securities must be bought or sold simultaneously, so that price movements for each security do not alter the portfolio allocation.
 
To consider how a basket trade is beneficial to an investment fund, suppose an index fund aims to track its target index by holding most or all the securities of the index. As new cash comes in that could increase the value of the fund, the manager must simultaneously buy a large number of securities in the proportion they are present in the index. If it were not possible to execute a basket trade on all of these securities, then the rapid price movements of the securities would prevent the index fund from holding the securities in the correct proportions. (For further reading, see: 5 Things You Need to Know About Index Funds.)
 
A basket trade typically involves the sale or purchase of 15 or more securities and is generally used to purchase stocks. Such baskets are typically measured against a benchmark or tracked against an entity, such as an index, to measure their returns.
 
Baskets can also be used to trade currencies and commodities. For example, an investor may create a basket that includes soft commodities, such as wheat, soybeans and corn. Most investment or brokerage firms that offer basket trading require a minimum investment amount.
 
The distribution of dollars between various components of a typical basket can be determined using various types of weightings. For example, a dollar weighting criteria distributes the overall dollar amount for the basket equally between its components. A basket trading strategy that uses share weighting will divide the overall amount equally between blocks of shares.
 
Suppose an investment fund wishes to take advantage of the volatility in an index. The fund manager creates a Long/Short basket to track the index. The basket does not actually contain securities. Instead it has a collection of call and put options.
