
BAT is an acronym referring to Baidu Inc. (BIDU), Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. (BABA) and Tencent Holdings Ltd. (0700.Hong Kong, TCEHY), three large Chinese internet stocks often likened to Alphabet Inc. (GOOG) subsidiary Google, Amazon.com Inc. (AMZN) and Facebook Inc. (FB). The BATs are often compared to the FANGs—or variations—which comprise Facebook, Amazon, Netflix Inc. (NFLX) and Alphabet.
 
Many commentators and the media often compare the success of the BATs relative to their American counterparts, the FANGs or FAANGs.
 
Below is a breakdown of some of their financial metrics as of March 2020:
 
Skeptics point out that Chinese stocks are frequently subject to speculative swings, and that tech is a frothy sector in any case. For those who consider the FANGs overvalued, the BATs are even more so. On the other hand, Chinese companies have a larger potential domestic market and have pulled ahead of American firms in some areas, such as mobile payments.
 
China's largest search engine. Google left China in 2010, allowing the Chinese company to grow with relatively little competition. It now controls around 72% of domestic market share.﻿﻿ It offers an encyclopedia similar to Wikipedia, though editing permissions are more tightly controlled. Other services include maps, social media, and music. The company researches artificial intelligence and self-driving cars.﻿﻿
 
An e-commerce firm that operates two main online portals: Taobao, for consumer-to-consumer commerce, and a business-to-consumer counterpart, Tmall.﻿﻿ The company has also developed a successful payments service, Alipay, which it spun off as a subsidiary of Ant Financial.﻿﻿ Alibaba has a cloud computing division and owns the South China Morning Post.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
The owner of WeChat, a messaging service with 1.2 billion users.﻿﻿ The app supports a popular payments service as well as a number of other features, leading FastCompany to call it China's "app for everything."﻿﻿ The company also owns successful massively multiplayer online games such as Clash of Clans, which boasts tens of millions of users.﻿﻿ 
 QPSoftware. "Top 7 Most Popular Chinese Search Engines." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Baidu Research. "Research Areas." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Alibaba. "Products." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Financial Times. "Alibaba restructuring paves way for Ant Financial IPO." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Alibaba Cloud. "Home." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. South China Morning Post. "Alibaba's Jack Ma revels why he bought the South China Morning Post and what he wants to do with it." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Statista. "Number of monthly active WeChat users from 2nd quarter 2011 to 2nd quarter 2020." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Fast Company. "How WeChat Became China's App for Everything." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020. Business of Apps. "Clash of Clans Revenue and Usage Statistics (2020)." Accessed Sept. 17, 2020.