
Gapping is when a stock, or another trading instrument, opens above or below the previous day’s close with no trading activity in between. Partial gapping occurs when the opening price is higher or lower than the previous day’s close but within the previous day’s price range. Full gapping occurs when the open is outside of the previous day’s range. Gapping, especially a full gap, shows a strong shift in sentiment occurred overnight.
 
Gapping may also refer to the difference in rates that banks borrow and lend out at. The dynamic gap measures how assets (money held) and liabilities (money loaned) change over time.
 
Gapping can occur in any instrument where the trading action closes and then reopens. Stocks do this on a daily basis. Currencies trade continuously throughout the week, but can still experience gaps between when the market closes before the weekend and reopens after.
 
There are different types of gaps, depending on the size of the gap and where they occur within the overall trend of the asset.
 
Common gaps occur frequently, have little significance, and are when the opening price is slightly different from the prior closing price. The lack of a significant price move on the gap, or after, shows the gap is common.
 
A breakaway gap occurs when the price moves above a significant resistance area or below a significant support area on the gap. It can also occur after the price has been in a tight trading range or when it moves out of a chart pattern. The breakaway gap indicates the start of a strong trending move, is typically a large gap, and the price tends to follow through in the gap direction over the next few weeks.
 
Runaway gaps occur during a strong trend and show that the trend is still strong enough to cause a gap in trend direction. In hindsight, these are gaps that occur mid-trend as the trend is really picking up steam. They are typically large and the price tends to follow through moving in the gap direction over the next few weeks.
 
Exhaustion gaps occur near the end of the trend. They are typically caused by stragglers jumping onboard late in a trend after having regret for not getting in earlier. Once the price gaps higher on this last push of demand, there are very few traders left to keep pushing the price in the trending direction. A reversal tends to follow within a few weeks.
 
All these types of gaps can be full or partial gaps. Common gaps are typically partial gaps, as the price doesn't move significantly. Although in some cases the price may not move much yet still end up being a full gap. Breakaway, runaway, and exhaustion gaps tend to be full gaps.
 
A trader can have a stop-loss order filled significantly below his or her stop-loss price (for a long position) due to gapping. For example, a trader may buy a stock on the close at $50 and place a stop-loss order at $45. The next day before the market opens, the company issues an unexpected profit warning, and the stock opens at $38. The trader’s stop-loss order now becomes a market order, because the stock’s price is below $45, and gets filled at the next available price which is the $38 open.
 
Traders can reduce gapping risk by not trading directly before company earnings and news announcements that are likely to have a material impact on a stock’s price. During periods of high volatility, reducing position size helps to minimize losses caused by gapping.
 
A trader in a short position can also get caught in a gap, resulting in larger losses than expected. A trader may be short at $20 with a stop loss at $22. The stock closes at $18, in a profitable position for the trader, but overnight another company expresses their interest in buying the company and the prices opens up the next day at $25. The trader is punched out of their position at $25, not $22, resulting in an extra $3 per share loss.
 
Some traders use gaps for analytical insight. For example, if a gap occurs relatively early in a trend, then it is probably a breakaway gap or a runaway gap, which lets the trader know the price likely has further to run.
 
Other traders use gaps for trading purposes. They may enter positions after a gap occurs.
 
Many stocks have frequent gaps, while others have fewer. Nearly all stocks are susceptible to having a gap following earnings or other major corporate announcements, such as a takeover bid. A stock may also gap, not because of something the company does, but because the overall market or sector is under selling or buying pressure. If the S&P 500 is sharply lower one morning, many stocks will gap down as a result, for example.
 
In the chart below, Facebook Inc. (FB) had a number of significantly large price gaps following earnings announcements. It also had many common gaps over the period shown; two are marked on the chart.
 
The chart also illustrates that a breakaway gap doesn't always need to be in the trending direction. A strong gap against the current trend could signal a break or reversal in the other direction.
 
The example also shows how devastating a gap can be, even if using a stop loss. Take for example the $217.50 close (high point on the chart). Many people would have bought on that day, as roughly 19 million shares changed hands. The following day the stock opened at $174.89 after a worse than expected earnings announcement. People who bought near $217 lost nearly 20% overnight.
