
The general business tax credit is the total value of all the individual credits to be applied against income on a tax return. This credit can be carried forward for a number of years in most cases and can also be carried back in some cases.﻿﻿
 
The general business tax credit is unique in that it is not a single separate credit. Instead, it represents a smorgasbord of specific tax credits that promote certain business activities, such as research, oil recovery, reforestation, or starting a pension plan. The individual credits are tallied up separately on their individual forms, each calculated under its own set of rules. The resulting combined credit is carried over to the General Business Tax Credit Form 3800 to determine the overall allowable credit. None of the credits listed can be used to offset the corporate alternative minimum tax. Some of the more common credits that are claimed include:
 
The general business tax credit is a non-refundable credit that directly reduces the tax bill. It can only reduce a taxpayer’s liability to zero; any amount that remains from the credit is automatically forfeited by the taxpayer. General business tax credit for the year consists of an entity's carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the total of its current year business credits. Unused credit must first be carried back one year, then carried forward for up to 20 years. With regards to the both the carryforward as well as the carryback provisions, the first-in first-out (FIFO) method is applied, which results in older credits being applied first, thereby, reducing the chance of credit expiration moving forward.﻿﻿
 
The general business credit can’t be more than the result of this formula:
 
If one spouse has no current or unused credit, then the other spouse may use the full $25,000 in determining his or her credit for the tax year.﻿﻿
 Internal Revenue Service. "Business Tax Credits." Accessed Jan. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "2019 Instructions for Form 3800: General Business Credit," Pages 1 & 2. Accessed Jan. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Code. "26 USC 38: General Business Credit(c)(1)," Pages 146 & 147. Accessed Jan. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Code. "26 USC 38: General Business Credit(6)(a)," Page 147. Accessed Jan. 28, 2020.