
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), signed on Oct. 30, 1947, by 23 countries, was a legal agreement minimizing barriers to international trade by eliminating or reducing quotas, tariffs, and subsidies while preserving significant regulations.﻿﻿ The GATT was intended to boost economic recovery after World War II through reconstructing and liberalizing global trade.
 
The GATT went into effect on Jan. 1, 1948.﻿﻿ Since that beginning it has been refined, eventually leading to the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) on January 1, 1995, which absorbed and extended it.﻿﻿ By this time 125 nations were signatories to its agreements, which covered about 90% of global trade.﻿﻿
 
The Council for Trade in Goods (Goods Council) is responsible for the GATT and consists of representatives from all WTO member countries. As of October 2020, the council chair is Swedish Ambassador Mikael Anzén. The council has 10 committees that address subjects including market access, agriculture, subsidies, and anti-dumping measures.﻿﻿
 
The GATT was created to form rules to end or restrict the most costly and undesirable features of the prewar protectionist period, namely quantitative trade barriers such as trade controls and quotas. The agreement also provided a system to arbitrate commercial disputes among nations, and the framework enabled a number of multilateral negotiations for the reduction of tariff barriers. The GATT was regarded as a significant success in the postwar years.
 
One of the key achievements of the GATT was that of trade without discrimination. Every signatory member of the GATT was to be treated as equal to any other.﻿﻿ This is known as the most-favored-nation principle, and it has been carried through into the WTO.﻿﻿ A practical outcome of this was that once a country had negotiated a tariff cut with some other countries (usually its most important trading partners), this same cut would automatically apply to all GATT signatories. Escape clauses did exist, whereby countries could negotiate exceptions if their domestic producers would be particularly harmed by tariff cuts.﻿﻿
 
Most nations adopted the most-favored-nation principle in setting tariffs, which largely replaced quotas. Tariffs (preferable to quotas but still a trade barrier) were in turn cut steadily in rounds of successive negotiations.
 The GATT instituted the most-favored-nation principle in tariff agreements among members. 
The GATT held eight rounds of meetings between April 1947 and December 1993. Each of the conferences had significant achievements and outcomes.
 
This series of meetings and reduced tariffs would continue, adding new GATT provisions in the process. The average tariff rate fell from around 22%, when the GATT was first signed in Geneva in 1947, to around 5% by the end of the Uruguay Round, concluded in 1993, which also negotiated the creation of the WTO.﻿﻿
 
In 1964 the GATT began to work toward curbing predatory pricing policies. These policies are known as dumping. As the years have passed, the countries have continued to attack global issues, including addressing agriculture disputes and working to protect intellectual property.
 Library of Congress. "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade," Pages 639–640. Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. Library of Congress. "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade," Page 639. Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. World Trade Organization. "The Uruguay Round." Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. Britannica. "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade." Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. World Trade Organization. "GATT and the Goods Council." Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. World Trade Organization. "Fiftieth Anniversary of the Multilateral Trading System." Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. Library of Congress. "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade," Page 641. Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. World Trade Organization. "1.6 Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment." Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. Library of Congress. "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade," Pages 659–662. Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. World Trade Organization. "On the Effects of GATT/WTO Membership on Trade," Page 5. Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. World Trade Organization. "Statement Made by H.E. Mr. Toru Hnguiwara." Accessed Oct. 1, 2020. Dartmouth. "The GATT's Starting Point: Tariff Levels Circa 1947," Pages 13 and 28. Accessed Oct. 1, 2020.