
Gentrification is the transformation of a city neighborhood from low value to high value. Gentrification is also viewed as a process of urban development in which a neighborhood or portion of a city develops rapidly in a short period of time, often as a result of urban-renewal programs. This process is often marked by inflated home prices and displacement of a neighborhood's previous residents.﻿﻿
 
Gentrification is derived from the word "gentry," which historically referred to people of an elevated social status. In the United Kingdom, the term "landed gentry" originally described landowners who could live off of the rental income from their properties. In its current context, gentrification was first popularized by the British sociologist Ruth Glass in 1964, when she used the term to describe the influx of middle-class people into London's working-class neighborhoods, displacing the former residents of those localities.﻿﻿
 
Numerous cities around the world experience the phenomenon of gentrification, which can have a direct impact on housing market dynamics. In most major cities, some neighborhoods that were previously less than desirable have morphed into vibrant districts with plush condominiums and offices, new coffee shops and restaurants, expensive retail storefronts, and various entertainment choices.
 
Gentrification is a complex social issue with both benefits and drawbacks. Young families welcome the opportunity to buy reasonably priced homes in a safe community with sound infrastructure, and a wide choice of amenities and services. Local municipalities and governments also benefit from collecting higher taxes on rising property values and increased economic activity. However, the neighborhoods' original inhabitants—also families, as well as singles of various ages—are often displaced from the very community that they helped build because of rising rents and a higher cost of living.
 
Gentrification has become controversial because, historically, it has come with a significant component of discrimination against racial minorities, women and children, the poor, and older adults. Even as it may bring about a reversal in the decline of a city, displacement caused by gentrification can force prior residents into poorer and relatively unsafe areas, with limited access to affordable housing, healthy food choices, and social networks. In turn, this can trigger increased stress levels and decreased mental health.
 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), vulnerable segments of the population are at increased risk for negative health effects of gentrification, such as shorter life expectancies and increased rates of cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Displacement often leads to exclusion of the original residents, particularly people of color, and a lack of government support—for low-income housing assistance, for example—as well as weakened social and community ties.﻿﻿
 A 2019 study by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition found that between 2000 and 2013, seven of the biggest U.S. cities—New York City, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Baltimore, San Diego, and Chicago—accounted for nearly half of the country's gentrification.﻿﻿ 
An oft-cited study of the Brookings Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy highlights some of the factors that contribute to gentrification.﻿﻿
 
Recent research challenges some long-held views about the negative effects of gentrification. In a July 2019 paper, researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the U.S. Census Bureau found that gentrification can create some important benefits for original residents, and few observable harms.﻿﻿
 European Journal of Public Health. "Urban Renewal, Gentrification, and Health Equity: A Realist Perspective." Accessed Sept. 8, 2020. Ruth Glass. "Introduction to London: Aspects of Change," Page XVIII. Centre for Urban Studies, London, 1964. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Health Effects of Gentrification." Accessed Sept. 8, 2020. National Community Reinvestment Coalition. "Shifting Neighborhoods." Accessed Sept. 8, 2020. The Brookings Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy. "Dealing with Neighborhood Change: A Primer on Gentrification and Policy Choices," Pages 10-14. Accessed Sept. 8, 2020. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. "The Effects of Gentrification on the Well-Being and Opportunity of Original Resident Adults and Children," Pages 4, 18, and 23. Accessed Sept. 8, 2020.