
Growth investing is an investment style and strategy that is focused on increasing an investor's capital. Growth investors typically invest in growth stocks—that is, young or small companies whose earnings are expected to increase at an above-average rate compared to their industry sector or the overall market.
 
Growth investing is highly attractive to many investors because buying stock in emerging companies can provide impressive returns if the companies are successful. However, such companies are untried, and thus often pose a fairly high risk.
 
Growth investors typically look for investments in rapidly expanding industries (or even entire markets) where new technologies and services are being developed, and look for profits through capital appreciation—that is, the gains they'll achieve when they sell their stock, as opposed to dividends they receive while they own it. In fact, most growth-stock companies reinvest their earnings back into the business, rather than pay a dividend to shareholders. They tend to be small, young companies (or companies that have just started trading publicly) with excellent potential.The idea is that the company will prosper and expand, and this growth in earnings and/or revenues will eventually translate into higher stock prices in the future.
 
Because investors seek to maximize their capital gains, growth investing is also known as a capital growth or a capital appreciation strategy.
 
Growth investors look at a company's or a market's potential for growth. There is no absolute formula for evaluating this potential; it requires a degree of individual interpretation, based on both objective and subjective factors, and judgment. Growth investors may use certain methods or criteria as a framework for their analysis, but these methods must be applied with a company's particular situation in mind: specifically, its current position vis-a-vis its past industry performance and historical financial performance.
 
In general, though, growth investors look at five key factors when selecting companies that may provide capital appreciation. These include:
 You can find growth stocks trading on any exchange and in any industrial sector—but you’ll usually find them in the fastest-growing industries. 
Ultimately, growth investors try to increase their wealth through long- or short-term capital appreciation. Growth investing is not the only capital appreciation investment strategy out there, of course. Value investing is another well-known one.
 
Some consider growth investing and value investing to be diametrically opposed approaches. Value investors seek stocks that trade below their intrinsic value or book value, whereas growth investors—while they do consider a company's fundamental worth—tend to ignore standard indicators that might show the stock to be overvalued.
 
While value investors look for stocks that are trading for less than their intrinsic value today—bargain-hunting so to speak—growth investors focus on the future potential of a company, with much less emphasis on the present stock price. Unlike value investors, growth investors may buy stock in companies that are trading higher than their intrinsic value—with the assumption that the intrinsic value will grow and ultimately exceed current valuations.
 
One notable name among growth investors is Thomas Rowe Price, Jr., aka the father of growth investing: In 1950 he set up the T. Rowe Price Growth Stock Fund, the first mutual fund to be offered by his advisory firm, T. Rowe Price Associates. This flagship fund averaged 15% growth annually for 22 years. Today, the T. Rowe Price Group is one of the largest financial services firms in the world.
 
Philip Fisher also has a notable name in the growth investing field. He outlined his growth investment style in his 1958 book Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits, the first of many he authored. Emphasizing the importance of research, especially through networking, it remains one of the most popular growth investing primers today.
 
Peter Lynch, manager of Fidelity Investments' legendary Magellan Fund, pioneered a hybrid model of growth and value investing, which is now commonly referred to as growth at a reasonable price (GARP) strategy.
