
Grunt work is an expression used to describe thankless and menial work. Grunt work can also refer to jobs that either lack glamour and prestige or are boring and repetitive. In the context of the finance industry, grunt work could entail combing through a company's financial records, looking for positive and negative developments, or analyzing historical trading data in the hope of finding the perfect stop-limit order points.
 
Grunt work, despite its lowly status, is often an essential component of climbing the career ladder. Some banks and firms have their own hierarchies, but financial careers on Wall Street typically follow a path similar to the following:
 
Grunt work often includes coordinating presentations, compiling analytical data, and administrative duties. For example, an analyst will likely be responsible for coordinating the publication of pitch books and marketing presentations for existing and prospective clients. Analytical work is Excel-heavy, including financial modeling, valuation, and credit analysis. Administrative work likely includes scheduling, coordinating meetings, and making travel arrangements. 
 
After the role of analyst, the next role in the traditional career progression of a finance professional is associate. Associates are either recruited directly out of MBA programs or are analysts that have been promoted after two years at the firm. The associate role is similar to the analyst role, with the additional responsibility of serving as a liaison between junior- and senior-level personnel.
 
In some instances, they may have opportunities to work directly with clients as well. Associates work closely with analysts, given their familiarity with and expectations for the role. Associates review the work of analysts, particularly when those individuals in the analyst role are working on any client-facing materials or analytical work.
 
Senior-level personnel–starting with vice presidents and moving on to directors and managing directors–assume additional responsibilities as they climb the career ladder and become decision-makers. Seniors prospect for deals and maintain client relationships, in addition to knowing how economic shifts and market dynamics can impact their industry at an expert level. The longer their tenure at the firm, the more institutional knowledge–or access to pertinent institutional knowledge–that can help them navigate that particular phase of their careers.
 
Grunt work has become a big topic of discussion for finance. In an effort to attract and retain top talent, which has become a challenge in recent years, many firms have been quickening the pace of promotion. Also, firms have been utilizing technology to reduce some of the labor-intensive grunt work typically associated with analyst- and associate-level positions, which often include long hours under deadline pressure. 
 
However, it could be said that for those just starting out in a career in the finance industry, grunt work is actually highly relevant because you need to master the grunt work if you are ever to be trusted with the higher-level, more complex tasks. Grunt work is a way for analysts and associates to demonstrate their competency by showing those in senior-level positions that they can effectively do the smaller or less important tasks first.
