
A guaranteed investment certificate (GIC) is a deposit investment sold by Canadian banks and trust companies. People often purchase them for retirement plans because they provide a low-risk fixed rate of return and are insured, to a degree, by the Canadian government.
 
The GIC works much like a certificate of deposit in the U.S. In the case of GICs, you deposit money in the bank and earn interest on that money. The catch is, the money must be deposited for a fixed length of time, and interest rates vary according to how long that commitment is. When you buy a GIC, you are basically lending the bank money and getting paid interest in return for the favor.
 
GICs are considered safe investments because the financial institutions that sell them are legally obligated to return investors' principal and interest. Even if the bank fails, investors are insured for up to 100,000 Canadian dollars by the Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation (GDIC).
 
A bank's profit is the difference between lending rates and the rates they pay on GICs. If mortgage rates are at 8% and GICs are at 5%, then that 3% difference is the bank's profit.
 
GICs offer a return that is slightly higher than Treasury bills (or T-bills), making them an excellent option to diversify a stream of liquid, safe securities in a portfolio. As noted above, many Canadian banks and trust companies sell GICs. While a trust company does not own the assets of its customers, it may assume some legal obligation to take care of them.
 
In these instances, trust companies act as fiduciaries, agents, or trustees on behalf of a person or business entity. They are a custodian and must safeguard and make investment selections that are solely in the interest of the outside party. GICs, along with T-bills, Treasury bonds, and other income-producing securities are often good options in these cases because they are safe, generally liquid, and produce streams of cash, particularly for older investors, retired, and might not have a steady salary anymore.
 
Other forms of safe and income-producing securities are U.S. Treasury securities, including T-bills, T-notes, and T-bonds.
 
GICs and U.S. government securities can be cornerstones of certain portfolio strategies—either those that rely on safe streams of income or as a base that balances out riskier investments such as growth stocks and derivatives.
