
The money supply is all the currency and other liquid instruments in a country's economy on the date measured. The money supply roughly includes both cash and deposits that can be used almost as easily as cash.
 
Governments issue paper currency and coin through some combination of their central banks and treasuries. Bank regulators influence money supply available to the public through the requirements placed on banks to hold reserves, how to extend credit and other regulation.
 
Economists analyze the money supply and develop policies revolving around it through controlling interest rates and increasing or decreasing the amount of money flowing in the economy. Public and private sector analysis is performed because of the money supply's possible impacts on price level, inflation, and the business cycle. In the United States, the Federal Reserve policy is the most important deciding factor in the money supply. The money supply is also known as the money stock.
 
An increase in the supply of money typically lowers interest rates, which in turn, generates more investment and puts more money in the hands of consumers, thereby stimulating spending. Businesses respond by ordering more raw materials and increasing production. The increased business activity raises the demand for labor. The opposite can occur if the money supply falls or when its growth rate declines.
 
Change in the money supply has long been considered to be a key factor in driving macroeconomic performance and business cycles. Macroeconomic schools of thought that focus heavily on the role of money supply include Irving Fisher's Quantity Theory of Money, Monetarism, and Austrian Business Cycle Theory.
 
Historically, measuring the money supply has shown that relationships exist between it and inflation and price levels. However, since 2000, these relationships have become unstable, reducing their reliability as a guide for monetary policy. Although money supply measures are still widely used, they are one of a wide array of economic data that economists and the Federal Reserve collects and reviews.﻿﻿
 
The various types of money in the money supply are generally classified as Ms, such as M0, M1, M2 and M3, according to the type and size of the account in which the instrument is kept. Not all of the classifications are widely used, and each country may use different classifications. The money supply reflects the different types of liquidity each type of money has in the economy. It is broken up into different categories of liquidity or spendability.﻿﻿
 
M0 and M1, for example, are also called narrow money and include coins and notes that are in circulation and other money equivalents that can be converted easily to cash. M2 includes M1 and, in addition, short-term time deposits in banks and certain money market funds.﻿﻿ M3 includes M2 in addition to long-term deposits. However, M3 is no longer included in the reporting by the Federal Reserve.﻿﻿ MZM, or money zero maturity, is a measure that includes financial assets with zero maturity and that are immediately redeemable at par. The Federal Reserve relies heavily on MZM data because its velocity is a proven indicator of inflation.﻿﻿
 
Money supply data is collected, recorded, and published periodically, typically by the country's government or central bank. The Federal Reserve in the United States measures and publishes the total amount of M1 and M2 money supplies on a weekly and monthly basis. They can be found online and are also published in newspapers. According to data from the Federal Reserve, as of June 2020 a little over $5.2 trillion in M1 money was in circulation, and more than $18.1 trillion in M2 money was circulating in the United States.﻿﻿
 Federal Reserve. "What Is the Money Supply? Is It Important?" Accessed Aug. 1, 2020.  Federal Reserve. "The Money Supply." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020. Federal Reserve. "Discontinuance of M3." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. "Velocity of MZM Money Stock." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020. Federal Reserve. "Money Stock and Debt Measures - H.6 Release." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020.