
UCLA Anderson School of Management is the graduate business school of the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA). Founded in 1935 and located in Los Angeles, California, it is considered one of the most prestigious business schools in the United States.
 
The UCLA Anderson School of Management is known for its Master of Business Administration (MBA) program, which emphasizes early specialization and the generation of hands-on experience. It is commonly ranked among the 20 best MBA programs in the United States by leading publications such as Businessweek, U.S. News, and the Financial Times.
 
In 2019, the UCLA Anderson School of Management’s full-time MBA program was rated as the 16th-best program in the United States by U.S. News, while its part-time program placed as the 5th-best program in that same year.
 
Previously known as the UCLA School of Business Administration, the UCLA Anderson School of Management received its current name in 1987, following a $15 million gift by the businessman and philanthropist, John E. Andersen. Today, UCLA Anderson School of Management is home to about 720 students spread across their various graduate programs, as well as over 150 faculty members.
 
The UCLA Anderson School of Management’s faculty includes experts in a wide variety of fields, including financial subjects such as accounting, angel investing, debt, and derivatives; operational subjects such as supply chain management, organizational behavior, and project management; and societal subjects such as political risk, organizational diversity, and monetary policy. For students interested in delving into particular specializations, the school operates a network of dedicated research centers, such as the Laurence & Lori Fink Center for Finance & Investments, the Morrison Center for Marketing & Data Analytics, and the Ziman Center for Real Estate, among others.
 
The UCLA Anderson School of Management offers a range of MBA and postgraduate programs. In addition to their full-time MBA program that students complete over the course of two years, they also offer a three-year “Fully Employed MBA” program and an expedited Executive MBA program that students can complete in two years. Other programs, such as the 15-month Global Executive MBA program, provide additional flexibility.
 
With an annual tuition of approximately $60,000, graduates of the UCLA Anderson School of Management MBA saw an average starting salary of $125,000 in 2018—the most recent year for which the school made data available. Of these, 80% had received their offers within three months of graduation.
 
In recent years, these grads have found employment principally in the technology, consulting, and financial services sectors, with Alphabet (GOOG), Microsoft (MSFT), and Deloitte being among their largest individual employers.
