
UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School is the business school of the University of North Carolina. The Kenan-Flagler School offers both graduate and undergraduate degrees as well as doctoral programs. The school has been ranked among the best by Bloomberg BusinessWeek magazine and has the only master of business administration (MBA) program in existence that devotes an entire quarter to leadership training.
 
Located in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, the Kenan-Flagler Business School was established in 1919 as the school's department of commerce. It was renamed in 1991 after two major benefactors of the school, philanthropist Mary Lily Kenan Flagler and her husband, Henry Morrison Flagler. The renaming was in response to a large gift from Frank Hawkins Kenan, another Kenan family member.
 
UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School has about combined 2,700 undergraduate and graduate students, and 5,500 executives in non-degree programs. The school has 121 full-time faculty from 20 countries in seven academic departments.
 
The UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School offers several graduate programs, including, full-time MBA, evening MBA, weekend MBA, online MBA and Global MBA programs. It also offers Master of Accounting and doctoral programs. The Global MBA allows students to learn from five accredited universities on four continents. The full-time MBA program emphasizes global perspectives and the business process model. It organizes the first year of study to simulate the cycle of running a business.
 
UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School has a student-run investment fund. The fund has more than $16 million in assets under management, across eight funds, the most of any business school.
 
The UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School community lists the following as its core values: excellence, leadership, integrity, community, and teamwork.
 
UNC Kenan-Flagler Business School has been ranked number four for online MBA programs by U.S. News and World Report, number seven for undergraduate business program by Bloomberg Businessweek, and number 16 for full-time MBA by U.S. News and World Report.
 
Notable UNC Kenan-Flagler Business Alumni include:
