
An unemployment claim is a request for cash benefits after getting laid off from a job. An individual makes an unemployment claim to the government of the state in which they worked to receive temporary payments after losing a job through no fault of their own. An unemployment claim is also known as an "unemployment insurance claim" or an "unemployment compensation claim."
 
The United States Department of Labor keeps track of the number of weekly unemployment claims. It provides both seasonally adjusted and seasonally unadjusted claims numbers and also lists which states had an increase or decrease of 1,000 or more claims.﻿﻿ This data is reported in the media as an indication of national and state economic health.
 
Unemployment claims are paid from state funds that are collected from employers in the form of an unemployment insurance tax. Unemployment benefits are payable for a limited number of weeks—most states provide up to 26 weeks of benefits—and are designed to replace about half of a worker's previous wages.﻿﻿
 
You must file an unemployment claim with the UI program in the state where you worked. Depending on the state, you can file a claim in person, online, or over the phone. When you file a claim, you must provide your Social Security number, contact information, and details about your former employment.
 
In addition, a worker must meet certain criteria. Workers receiving unemployment benefits, for example, must be actively seeking employment (and be able to prove it), and they must have been laid off rather than having quit or been fired.
 
The initial date of an unemployment claim determines the benefit year during which a claimant may file weekly claims...as well as the base period of the claim. The base period determines the wages that will be used to compute the claimant's weekly and maximum benefit amounts and for which employers will have potential chargeback or reimbursement liability for any benefits paid to the claimant. Only base period employers are part of an unemployment claim. Non-base period employers have no such liability.
 
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, a $2 trillion coronavirus emergency stimulus package. The Act expands states' ability to provide UI to many workers affected by COVID-19, including people who aren't ordinarily eligible for unemployment benefits.
 
There are three specific programs to help Americans out of work due to the coronavirus:     
 If you have applied or are planning on applying for unemployment insurance under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) program, be sure to check with your individual state to determine when your last PUA payment will be issued. 
To find out the rules in your state, check with your state's unemployment insurance program. Most states recommend that you make an unemployment claim online during this time, but be aware that many states' websites have crashed or are very slow. If you have tried and been unable to file, watch for updates on your state's program website. Many states have indicated they will backdate claims to the date you first became unemployed.
 As of the first week of April, PUA is still being set up by the U.S. Department of Labor. It may take some time for states to be ready to process claims for freelancers, gig workers, and independent contractors.  
When you file an unemployment claim is very important. Consider, for example, an employer that hires an employee in March and lets that individual go after 30 days.
 
If the claimant files an initial claim before April 1, the base period would not include the first quarter of that year (the quarter in progress), nor the fourth quarter of the preceding year (the lag quarter). It actually consists of the fourth quarter of the year before the year preceding the current year, and the first three quarters of the year preceding the current year. However, since the employer did not report wages during that base period, it will have no financial involvement in the claim.
 
The same would apply if the claimant waited until April, May, or June to file the initial claim—in that case, the base period would omit the second quarter of the current year, the first quarter of the current year, and consist of the four quarters of the preceding year. If the ex-employee files an initial claim after June 30 of the current year, then the employer could be a base period employer, but its chargeback liability would be limited due to having paid only 30 days' worth of wages.
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Local Area Unemployment Statistics." Accessed July 28, 2020. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "Policy Basics: Unemployment Insurance." Accessed July 28, 2020. U.S. Department of Labor: Employment and Training Administration. "UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE PROGRAM LETTER NO. 15-20." Accessed July 28, 2020.