
The University of Miami School of Business Administration is the business school at the University of Miami. Its enrollment in 2018 was approximately 2,330 undergraduate and 900 graduate-level students. The University of Miami School of Business Administration offers undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs in a variety of business disciplines, including accounting, finance, information sciences, marketing, and management.
 
Located in Coral Gables, Florida, the University of Miami School of Business Administration was established in 1929. It first offered full-time master of business administration (MBA) program in 1948. In 1973, the school offered an executive MBA program for professionals already working in their field. The school’s stated mission is to develop innovative ideas and principled leaders that transform global business and society.
 
The University of Miami Business School offers two undergraduate degrees: a bachelor’s of business administration and a bachelor of science in business administration. The graduate school offers master’s, MBA, executive MBA and doctoral programs. The school also offers a dual JD/MBA and a joint MD/MBA program.
 
The University of Miami School of Business Administration offers undergraduate 14 majors and minors:
 
Undergraduates may also pursue dual degrees in other disciplines in the College of Arts & Sciences, the School of Education & Human Development, the School of Communication, the Frost School of Music, and the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science.
 
Undergraduates are encouraged to study abroad and can apply financial aid and scholarship to semester-abroad programs.
 
The graduate school offers the following programs:
 
The executive MBA program is structures so students can work toward a degree over 23 months on a part-time basis.
 
The doctoral program offers PhDs in business and economics. Students pursuing a PhD in business choose a concentration in accounting, finance, management science, marketing, operations management, organizational behavior or strategy/international business.
 
The executive MBA program was ranked 26th in the nation by the Economist in 2015. The undergraduate program was ranked 31st in the nation by Bloomberg BusinessWeek in 2016. The full-time MBA program was ranked 49th in the nation by the Economist in 2017.
 
Notable alumni include: Gerald Cahill, Jr., president and CEO of Carnival Cruise Lines; Jason Liberty, senior vice president and CFO, Royal Caribbean Cruises; and Brian Rice, former executive vice president and CFO, Royal Caribbean Cruises.
