
Unregistered shares, also called restricted stock, are securities that are not registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). They are usually issued through private placements, Regulation D offerings, or employee stock benefit plans as compensation for professional services, or in exchange for funding a startup company. For example, a privately-held company might issue unregistered shares to its executives and board members as part of their compensation package.
 
Unregistered shares have fewer investor protections and pose different kinds of risks than registered securities. As a result, companies can only sell unregistered shares to "qualified investors."
 
To be considered a "qualified investor," you must be a high-net-worth individual (HNWI) or a high-income investor. Who qualifies as an HNWI differs by the financial institution, but typically you must have liquid assets that range from six to seven figures. A high-income investor typically has at least $200,000 invested per year or at least $300,000 per year for married couples.
 
In the past, soliciting or advertising unregistered shares was prohibited. However, in 2013 the SEC adopted Rule 506(c) as part of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, allowing certain unregistered securities to be solicited and advertised.
 
Selling unregistered shares is typically considered a felony, but there are exceptions to this rule. SEC Rule 144 lays out the conditions under which unregistered shares may be sold:
 
Sometimes investors can be taken advantage of through unregistered securities scams. These scams usually advertise the sales as private offerings with little to no risk plus high returns.
 
The SEC recommends that investors should be on the lookout for some of these common signs of potential fraud when considering investing in an unregistered offering:
 
Investors can also find out if a particular security is registered by looking it up in the SEC’s EDGAR database online. Stocks traded by the average investor will all be registered in the database.
