
The current account is a section in a country's balance of payments (BOP) that records its current transactions. The account is divided into four sections: goods, services, income (such as salaries and investment income) and unilateral transfers (for example, workers' remittances).
 
A current account deficit occurs when a country has an excess of one or more of the four factors making up the account. When a current transaction enters the account, it is recorded as a credit; when a value leaves the account, it is marked as a debit. Basically, a current account deficit occurs when more money is being paid out than brought into a country.
 
When a current account is in deficit, it usually means that a country is investing more abroad than it is saving at home. Often, the logic dictating a country's investment decisions is that it takes money to make money. In order to try to boost its gross domestic production (GDP) and future growth, a country may go into debt, taking on liabilities to other countries. It then becomes what is termed as a "net debtor" to the world. However, a problematic deficit can result if a government has not planned out a sound economic policy and used its debts for consumption purposes, not future growth. (For more insight, see A Look At National Debt and Government Bonds.)
 
A current account deficit implies that a country's economy is functioning on borrowed means. In other words, other countries are essentially financing the economy, and hence sustaining the deficit. When determining the economic health of a nation, it is important to understand where the deficit stems from, how it's being financed and what possible solutions exist for its alleviation. To do so, we need to look at not only the current account, but also the other two sections of the BOP, the capital account and the financial account.
 
Is a current account deficit simply a matter of a government's bad planning and/or uncontrollable spending and consumption? Well, sometimes. But more often than not, a deficit is planned for the purpose of helping an economy's development and growth. It can also be a sign of a strong economy that is a safe haven for foreign funds (we'll explain this below). When an economy is in a state of transition or reform, or is pursuing an active strategy of growth, running a deficit today can provide funding for domestic consumption and investment tomorrow. Here are some of the types of deficits, both planned and unplanned, that countries experience.
 
In order to determine whether a country's economy is weak, it is important to know why there is a deficit and how it is being financed. A deficit can be a sign of economic trouble for some countries, and a sign of economic health for others. To support the current account deficits of countries around the world, the global economy must be strong enough so that exports can be bought and investment income repaid. Often, however, a current account deficit cannot be sustained for too long - it is widely debated whether the consumption of today will result in chronic debt for future generations.
