
EUR/USD held within a range below the psychological 1.1800 handle in European trading on Tuesday as investors await guidance from the Federal Reserve, which is scheduled to meet on Wednesday. With several risk events this week, a breakout appears to be inevitable, while a technical pattern favors a break to the upside.
 
The currency pair broke higher from an inverse head-and-shoulders pattern late last week that projects a measured move target near 1.2150. Thus far, buyers have firmly protected the neckline of the pattern, but naturally, bulls have been hesitant to follow through ahead of several risk events this week.
 
On Wednesday, the Federal Reserve is widely expected to announce an interest rate hike. The move has been priced in, and fluctuations in the greenback will be largely dependent on forward guidance. Policy makers will be sharing their latest thoughts on the economy and updating the dot plot into 2021.
 
In addition to the central bank meeting, the markets will also be sensitive to ongoing trade discussions. Market participants have been familiar with the ongoing impacts of headline news related to talks between China and the United States – however, NAFTA negotiations have once again come into the spotlight. U.S. officials are looking to finalize an agreement by the end of the month, which is less than one week from today. The concern seems to be with Canada, as U.S. officials have stated that concessions were not being made to push a deal through. There is a possibility of a bilateral agreement between the U.S. and Mexico if an agreement cannot be made with Canada prior to the deadline.
 
[Find a reliable broker for your currency trades using Investopedia's forex broker reviews.]
 
In terms of economic data, euro area inflation data will be released on Friday. European Central Bank (ECB) President Mario Draghi triggered a surge of buying in EUR/USD earlier in the week after he stated that he saw a "relatively vigorous" pickup in underlying inflation in the euro area. Draghi's comments hint of a strong CPI report, and the extent of strength will ultimately determine the reaction in EUR/USD, as a boost in inflation raises the odds of the ECB following through with intentions to start raising rates next summer.
 
In addition to the technical pattern in EUR/USD, the dollar has been distinctly weak, and in September thus far, the U.S. currency has fallen against all of its major counterparts with the exception of the Japanese yen. On the other side, the euro has in the same time frame gained versus all its major counterparts with the exception of the British pound. EUR/USD reached a low of 1.1300 in August and has recovered nearly 500 pips since then, with relatively small retracements. This type of price action suggests that long-term bears are not rushing in to sell into what still appears to be a downtrend from highs posted in the early year.
 
Similar to the exchange rate, the inversely correlated U.S. dollar index (DXY) is also seen falling into a range in the early week. Downside support at 93.87 held DXY higher on a sharp fall last Friday, and bulls have defended the level on several attempts since. Near-term upside resistance at 94.35 was prior support and has been capping rallies. Support at 93.87 roughly equates to 1.1800 in EUR/USD.
 
Further horizontal resistance in the exchange rate is found at 1.1838, as the level held the pair lower on a correction in June. Ahead of the inverse head and shoulders measured move target, a declining trendline from this year's high comes into place, currently found near the psychological 1.2000 handle. To the downside, support is found at 1.1714, which reflects a horizontal level that is within close proximity of the neckline from the technical pattern. A sustained drop below it is likely to trigger some stops from traders playing the pattern.

A tobacco or cigarette tax is imposed on all tobacco products by various levels of government to fund healthcare programs. The tax mainly contributes to cancer research and smoking prevention and cessation programs. The idea behind the cigarette tax is that it would lead to a reduction in the demand for tobacco products, especially among youths.
 
Federal and state governments impose a tax on all tobacco products, which means that tobacco consumers are responsible for paying the tax. Types of tobacco products include cigarettes, pipe tobacco, cigars, hookah/shisha tobacco, snuff, etc.
 
The terms "Tobacco Tax" and "Cigarette Tax" are used interchangeably. Cigarette tax includes excise tax, sales tax, value-added tax (VAT), and duty tax. Taxes on vices like tobacco and alcohol are also called sin taxes.
 
The first excise tax within the U.S. was introduced in 1791 by the secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton. Since excise taxes are levied on the sale and production for sale of tobacco products, the price offered to buyers is higher relative to the price of other goods and services. This is because the producers, manufacturers, and wholesalers pay the excise tax and in a bid to recover the tax paid on these products, they inflate the price which is transferred to the final consumers. Each state has different prices due to varying state tax rates in addition to a different manufacturer, wholesaler, and retailer pricing and discounting practices.
 
Of the 50 US States and District of Columbia, the 5 states with the highest excise tax (dollars) per cigarette pack as of 2018 are:
 
The lowest state cigarette taxes are in:
 
This data is as of January 2018.
 
Critics of tobacco taxes state that since smoking is an addictive habit, increasing the price of tobacco products would do little to curb the number of sales made. Instead, the number of illegal sales of untaxed cigarettes that come into the city from low-tax states will increase.
 
Most cities and counties do not have tobacco taxes. For example, the states of Michigan, Washington, and Hawaii have no local tobacco tax. Some states have multiple local taxes, while some others have only one. New York City, for example, is the only locality in the state of New York with cigarette taxes. Of the 8.5 million residents of NYC, it is estimated that about 900,000 smoke and that 12,000 die annually from tobacco-related illnesses. In April 2017, the city proposed a bill that would increase the taxes on cigarettes and other tobacco-related products with the hope that the number of smokers will be trimmed down to 160,000 within the following three years. The additional revenue collected from the price hikes is to be used to fund public housing in the city. In addition to increasing the price for all tobacco products, the bill will also ban pharmacies from selling tobacco products, reduce the number of tobacco retailers in the city, and require all residential buildings to have a non-smoking policy.
 
There is some debate about whether high taxes on products like tobacco work — and that depends on who you ask. The Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education does admit that tobacco taxes contribute to the reduction of smoking and tobacco use in general but says it does not find them very effective. The reason being that since the tax affects the price, small increases will not necessarily dissuade consumers from buying tobacco products. And in these cases — with smaller tax hikes — cigarette companies may even lower their prices to compensate. The increase would, therefore, have to be so large that it would deter consumers from making future purchases and dissuade companies from lowering their prices. 
 
But supporters of cigarette taxes say otherwise. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), these taxes are the most effective way to reduce consumption and demand. The organization says that higher prices have led to more people quitting and they reduce the chances of a former smoker relapsing. WHO says that, on average, a 10 percent increase in price (including taxes) would account for a 4 percent drop in demand in high-income countries and a 5 percent drop in low- and middle-income countries. 
