
Government purchases are expenditures on goods and services by federal, state, and local governments. The combined total of this spending, excluding transfer payments and interest on the debt, is a key factor in determining a nation's gross domestic product (GDP). Transfer payments are expenditures that do not involve purchases, such as Social Security payments and farm subsidies.
 
One method of calculating a nation's GDP is to add up all spending in four major categories:
 
The U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has a number of sub-categories. For instance, it breaks down government purchases into federal, state, and local spending and also differentiates defense-related federal spending from all other spending. The total for imported goods is subtracted from the final GDP total. Government purchases have risen in real terms over recent decades: 
 
As a share of overall nominal GDP, however, nominal government purchases have been falling:
 
Government purchases are seen as a crucial element of a healthy economy in Keynesian economic theory. That is, increasing or decreasing government spending is viewed as a key tool for regulating the business cycle.
 
According to this theory, government spending boosts demand in two ways. First, the government directly boosts demand by purchasing goods, such as the steel needed to build a bridge. Secondly, it puts money in the pockets of both workers and suppliers, who then spend it on goods and services. This is known as the multiplier effect.
 
Government purchases range from spending on infrastructure projects to paying civil service and public service employees to buying office software and equipment and maintaining public buildings. Transfer payments, which do not involve purchases, are not included in this category.
 
For example, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) estimated that GDP grew by 2.9% to $20.5 trillion in 2018. It noted that increases in personal consumption, business investment, net exports, and federal purchases offset decreases in state and local spending to arrive at that figure.
 
Government purchases contributed about $3.18 trillion, or about 17% of that total. About $1.23 trillion of that was spending by the federal government, and 60% of its total spending was related to national defense.
 
Where does all the money used for government purchases go? Most of it goes through the hands of consumers. Consumer spending accounted for about 69% of all GDP in 2018. Altogether they spent about $4.5 trillion on durable and non-durable goods and services. For the second quarter of 2019 found GDP grew at a 2.0% annual rate, notably due to increased personal and government spending.
