
Japan has become one of the top 10 most popular destinations for U.S. students studying abroad.﻿﻿ According to the President of the Institute of International Education, Dr. Allen E. Goodman, "International experience is one of the most important components of a 21st-century education, and study abroad should be viewed as an essential element of a college degree."﻿﻿
 
Across the globe, the number of students spending time overseas is at a record high, yet few U.S. colleges students go abroad. According to NAFSA, the number of U.S. students studying abroad for credit during the 2017 to 2018 academic year grew by 2.7% from 332,727 students to 341,751 students from the year before, but this statistic represents only 1.7 percent of all higher education-enrolled U.S. students and around 10% of U.S. graduates.﻿﻿ Many students are wary of the price tag of international study, but the cost of study in Japan may be the same or even less than a semester at your home university. 
 
Gain new perspectives, priceless memories, and a competitive advantage with future employers by following this guide to studying abroad in the world’s third-largest economy:
 
Studying abroad, like all educational experiences, is an investment in your future. Select a program based on what you want to learn, from language skills to specific courses. 
 
You have many scholarships and financial aid options, including federal funds. First, speak with your university about how your current aid or loans could apply abroad. Also, look for program-specific scholarships and check out IIEPassport’s excellent Study Abroad Funding along with Diversity Abroad and CEA Study Abroad. The Japan Study Support website also lists scholarships for international students. 
 
The cost of living in Japan is actually about 25% lower than living in New York City, even with Tokyo as the country’s most expensive city.﻿﻿ The Japan Student Services Organization (JASSO) estimates that international students across the country spend around $781 for all monthly expenses, excluding academic fees.﻿﻿
 
Many programs include flights, housing and meals. If you are arranging these on your own, some budgeting tips are below:
 
• Flights
 
Flights will likely cost over $1,000 round trip. You should check websites like Kayak to compare different prices and pay attention to luggage fees.
 
• Passport, Visas and Insurance
 
Make sure you have a passport that is not about to expire. Students planning on staying in Japan for over 90 days must apply for a free student visa and purchase Japan’s national health insurance.﻿﻿ Typically it costs less than $25 per month to belong to one of the best healthcare systems in the world.﻿﻿
 
• Housing 
 
Take advantage of university options for housing. Programs often include a range of choices from dormitories to home stays to apartments with local roommates. According to JASSO, international students throughout the country spend around $300 a month on housing.﻿﻿
 
• Cell Phones
 
Check whether your phone will work in Japan and how to avoid roaming charges. If you bring an unlocked smartphone, you can rent a data-only SIM card relatively cheaply per month, or you can rent or purchase a pre-paid phone.  
 
Japan has a wide variety of quality, economical food options and you don’t even need to tip! JASSO estimates that food costs international students around $237 a month.﻿﻿ Restaurants cost about half the price of those in New York City. As little as $3 could buy you a bowl of ramen or a domestic Japanese beer at a restaurant. You can also find better deals at diner-like teishoku-ya or izakaya pubs. For a splurge, the average cost of a three-course meal for two at a Japanese restaurant is just $47!﻿﻿
 
Enjoy one of the most sophisticated, efficient transportation systems in the world. The average one-way local ticket is about $1.89 and a Tokyo metro day pass costs ¥600 (under $6).﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Compare buses, trains and plane ticket prices when traveling the country. A seven-day Japan rail pass costs ¥29,650 (around $280), and domestic flights can be reasonable.﻿﻿ Take advantage of free tourist attractions like Tokyo’s Imperial Palace and the Sumo Museum.  
 
The best education takes you beyond the classroom to new, memorable experiences. Research program and scholarship options, talk to your university, make a budget, and you could be on your way to the Land of the Rising Sun!
 
For more advice on financing your study abroad, check out You CAN Afford To Study Abroad. While you are still in the planning stages and considering options. You may also be interested in Study Abroad: Budget for Spain and Study Abroad: Budget for Italy. 
 Institute of International Education. "Leading Destinations." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Institute of International Education. "Open Doors 2014 Report." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. NAFSA: Association of International Educators. "Trends in U.S. Study Abroad." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Nanzan University. "Center for Japanese Studies." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Nanzan University. "Tuition and Fees: Center for Japanese Studies." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. CET Academic Programs. "CET Japan." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. "Global 30 Project." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. University of Tokyo. "Prospective Students: Admission Fee, Tuition and Exemptions." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Expatistan. "Cost of Living in Tokyo, Japan vs New York City, United States." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Japan Student Services Organization. "Student Guide to Japan 2019-2020," Page 33. Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Japan Student Services Organization. "Student Guide to Japan 2019-2020," Page 40. Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Numbeo. "Cost of Living Comparison Between Tokyo and New York, NY." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. Tokyo Metro. "1-Day Open Tickets." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Voyagin. "JR Pass – 7, 14, or 21 Days Unlimited Rail Travel in Japan." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020.