
The Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index (MCSI) is a monthly survey of consumer confidence levels in the United States conducted by the University of Michigan. The survey is based on telephone interviews that gather information on consumer expectations for the economy.﻿﻿
 
The preliminary report is generally released during the middle of the month and covers survey responses collected in the first two weeks of the month. The final report is released at the end of the month and covers the full month.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
George Katona founded the survey at the University of Michigan in 1946. It is designed to capture the mood of American consumers. Whether the sentiment is optimistic, pessimistic or neutral, the survey signals information about near-term consumer spending plans.﻿﻿
 
Because consumer spending accounts for about 67% of gross domestic product (GDP) in the U.S,﻿﻿ the MCSI is regarded as one of many important economic indicators followed by businesses, policymakers and participants in the investment community.
 
Each month, the university conducts a minimum of 500 phone interviews across the continental U.S. The survey asks 50 core questions and covers three areas: personal finances, business condition and buying conditions.﻿﻿ Consumers are asked questions such as:
 
According to the University of Michigan, the surveys "have proven to be an accurate indicator of the future course of the national economy."﻿﻿ Surveys have demonstrated their ability to accurately anticipate changes in interest rates, unemployment rates, inflation rates, GDP growth, housing, car demand and other key economic measures.
 Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan. "Surveys of Consumers." Accessed Sep. 13, 2020. Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan. "Release dates for 2020," page 1. Accessed Sep. 13, 2020. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. "Shares of gross domestic product: Personal consumption expenditures." Accessed Sep. 13, 2020. Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan. "Survey of Consumers: Interview Dates 2020," page 1. Accessed Sep. 13, 2020. Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan. "Survey Description," page 1. Accessed Sep. 13, 2020. Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan. "Questionnaire," pages 1-3. Accessed Sep. 13, 2020.