
The producer price index (PPI), published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), is a group of indices that calculates and represents the average movement in selling prices from domestic production over time.
 
The PPI measures price movements from the seller's point of view. Conversely, the consumer price index (CPI), measures cost changes from the viewpoint of the consumer. In other words, this index tracks change to the cost of production. There are three areas of PPI classification that use the same pool of data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics namely industry, commodity. and commodity-based final and intermediate demand (FD-ID).
 
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) releases monthly information that includes the measurement of nearly 10.000 individual products and product groups. This data contains almost all industries that produce goods in the United States. Some of the sectors covered include construction, agriculture, manufacturing, and mining.
 Until 1978, the PPI was known as the wholesale price index (WPI). In 1982, the BLS reset all producer price index bases to 100, and this event became the base year. 
Each specific measurement period, product group, or an individual product type, begins with a base period number of 100. As production increases or decreases, the movements can then be compared against the base number. As an example, say the production of balloons has a PPI of 115 for the month of July. The 115 figure indicates that it cost the balloon manufacturing industry 15% more to produce balloons in July as it did in June.
 
Businesses often enter into long-term contracts with suppliers. Because prices fluctuate over time, such long-term deals would be difficult with only a single, fixed price for the goods or supplies. Instead, the purchasing business and the supplier typically include a clause in the contract that adjusts the cost by external indicators, such as the PPI.
 
For example, Company A might get a key component for its widgets from Industry Z. At the outset of the deal, the cost of that component is $1, but they include a provision in the contract that the price will be adjusted quarterly, according to the PPI. So, three months after the contract is signed, the cost of the component could be $1.02 each or $0.99 each, depending on whether or not the PPI went up or down and how much it changed.
 
BLS produces thousands of product price indexes each month. An analyst can review information broken into three large categories and then further drill down to specific products or services.
