
Stump the chump is a term for when one person challenges or questions another person in front of others to make him or her appear foolish. This divisive behavior can occur in a meeting, presentation, conference, or other type of forum. The one who is posing the challenge may be said to be attacking the other, sometimes with hostility, as in heckling. An example of stump-the-chump conduct is asking an expert presenter a question that he will not be able to answer, potentially to undermine his credibility.
 
Stump the chump is a dynamic whereby someone in an audience repeatedly questions the person who is doing the presenting, speaking, or leading at a meeting or other event. The questioning generally carries an aggressive tone, which often is disruptive to all present. Sometimes this behavior is a conscious psychological ploy—as used in the fields of politics, law, human resources, or entertainment; but often, it may come from a subconscious, destructive impulse within the aggressor.
 
The phrase stump the chump may apply to contexts other than corporate meetings and events, such as:
 
In a corporate setting, when someone tries to stump the chump, whether conscious or unconscious, the motives are various. For example, the stumper may want to make himself look smart and in control while trying to make the speaker look incompetent. He may be challenging the speaker’s authority by trying to show that he knows better. He may be stealing the spotlight to position himself for a promotion or raise. If the meeting involves higher authorities or important guests, the stumper might be trying to impress them by impairing the speaker, while showing himself in a positive light.
 
Although it is not pleasant to find yourself on the receiving end of stump-the-chump questions, you are not necessarily powerless in their face. If you find yourself being heckled by someone in this manner, you can try to diffuse the situation by refusing to become hostile (regardless of the questioner's attitude) and by remaining upbeat and unflappable (at least outwardly). 
 
Below are some concrete tips that can help in this sticky situation:
 
2020 Democratic Presidential Candidate Pete Buttigeig, who is openly gay and Christian, has been heckled several times during his campaign. At one of his rallies in Des Moines, Iowa, a heckler yelled "Remember Sodom and Gomorrah", a reference to the two cities mentioned in the Bible which were destroyed by God, during his speech. While they have been debated, most interpretations of the Bible believe that homosexual behavior was the cause of their destruction.
 
Buttigeig did not lose control and remarked: "The good news is, the condition of my soul is in the hands of God, but the Iowa caucuses are up to you." In Fort Dodge, a protester interrupted Buttigeig's speech and shouted: "You betray your baptism." Buttigeig defused the situation with humor and said: “Coffee after church gets a little rowdy sometimes.” He added: “We’re so dug-in, in such passionate ways, and I respect that, too. That gentleman believes that what he is doing is in line with the will of the creator. I’d do it differently. We ought to be able to do it differently.”
