
A multiplier is a factor in economics that proportionally augments or increases other related variables when it is applied. Multipliers are commonly used in the field of macroeconomics—the area of economics that studies the behavior of the economy as a whole. There are a number of different multipliers including the earnings multiplier, fiscal multiplier, investment multiplier, and the Keynesian multiplier. Read on to find out more about the Keynesian multiplier and how it works.
 
Richard Kahn introduced the Keynesian multiplier in 1931.﻿﻿ The principle behind his theory states that the more the government spends—or invests in the economy—the greater the chance that the economy will flourish. Regardless of the type of government spending, it will lead to cycles of economic prosperity and increased employment, raising gross domestic product (GDP) by a larger amount of the increase. So $1 billion in government spending will raise a country's GDP by more than the amount spent.
 
Here's a hypothetical example of how this multiplier works. Let's say a $100 million government project—whether to build a dam or to dig and refill a giant hole—might pay $50 million in pure labor costs. The workers then take that $50 million and, minus the average saving rate, spend it at various businesses. These businesses now have more money to hire more people to make more products, leading to another round of spending. In short, one dollar of government spending will generate more than a dollar in economic growth. This idea was at the core of the New Deal and the growth of the welfare state.
 The core of the New Deal and the growth of the welfare state are based on the theory of the Keynesian multiplier. 
Taken further, if people didn't save anything, the economy would be an unstoppable engine running at full employment. Keynesians wanted to tax savings to encourage people to spend more. The Keynesian model—developed by British economist John Maynard Keynes—arbitrarily separated private savings and investment into two separate functions, showing the savings as a drain on the economy and thus making them look inferior to deficit spending. But unless someone holds his or her savings entirely in cash—and true hoarding like this is rare—savings are investing, either by the individual or by the bank holding the capital.
 
Milton Friedman, among others, showed that the Keynesian multiplier was both incorrectly formulated and fundamentally flawed.﻿﻿ One flaw is ignoring how governments finance spending by taxation or through debt issues. Raising taxes takes the same or more out of the economy as saving, while raising funds by bonds causes the government to go in debt. The growth of debt becomes a powerful incentive for the government to raise taxes or inflate the currency to pay it off, thus lowering the purchasing power of each dollar that the workers are earning.
 
Perhaps the biggest flaw, however, is ignoring the fact that saving and investing have a multiplier effect at least equal to that of deficit spending. This, of course, comes without the debt downside. In the end, it comes down to whether you trust private individuals to spend their own money wisely or whether you think government officials will do a better job.
 R.F. Kahn. "The Relation of Home Investment to Unemployment." The Economic Journal, Vol. 41, No. 162, June 1931. Milton Friedman. "Capitalism and Freedom," Pages 70-73. The University of Chicago Press, 1982.