
The Kelley School of Business, the business college of Indiana University, offers both undergraduate and graduate programs in many fields, including finance, accounting, marketing, and management. It is one of only three schools to have all of its graduate and undergraduate programs ranked in the top 20 by U.S. News and World Report.
 
The Kelley School of Business was founded in 1920. It has locations at the Bloomington and Indianapolis campuses of Indiana University. Corporate headhunters looking for management, financial and marketing talent heavily recruit students from the school. The school also offers a distance-learning program, Kelley Direct, which teaches over 1,000 students.
 
The Kelley School of Business has had several notable alumni that have achieved success in the corporate world. Marshall Armstrong chaired the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). John Chambers is the chief executive officer (CEO) of Cisco Systems, one of the largest computer software companies in the world. Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas Mavericks, graduated from the school in 1981. Cheryl A. Bachelder once presided over KFC, the fast-food chain that specializes in fried chicken dishes.
 
Several distinguished public servants also graduated from the Kelley School of Business. Evan Bayh III became governor of Indiana and a U.S. senator. Richard Lesher is the president of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States. John C. Partee was a governor of the U.S. Federal Reserve. Milton Wilson became the dean of Howard University's School of Business and Public Administration.
 
The undergraduate program at the Bloomington campus offers 13 different majors. The online MBA program supplements other online master's degrees, such as global supply chain management, business analytics and entrepreneurship. The graduate accounting program has a placement rate of nearly 100%.
 
Indiana University claims its business program has a job placement rate of nearly 95% among graduates who enter the workforce or enroll in a post-graduate program. Accounting majors have an average starting salary of $59,157 and a range of $40,500 to $85,000. Graduates who earn a finance major start with an average salary of $61,097, with a range of $35,000 to $85,000. Marketing majors start out at $54,333 and a range of $27,500 to $72,500.
 
Among all majors, graduates have an average starting salary of $59,025. Kelley School of Business graduated 1,260 seniors in 2015. Of those, 72% reported their status upon graduation. Of those graduating in 2015, 851 students were actively seeking employment three months after graduation. This graduating class accepted jobs in 29 states. Some of the top urban areas with Kelley School of Business graduates include Chicago, Indianapolis, New York, San Francisco and St. Louis.
