
The term kidnap insurance refers to insurance coverage that is designed to protect individuals from the risk of being kidnapped. Depending on the insurer and type of coverage, kidnap insurance may cover things like extortion, ransom, death, financial loss, medical costs, travel-related expenses. This kind of insurance is commonly purchased by corporations and wealthy individuals, especially those that require travel to places in the world where kidnapping is a common occurrence.
 
Kidnap insurance may sound exotic but isn’t really such a novel idea. It works in the same fashion as any other type of insurance coverage. Just like life insurance provides protection against death, kidnap insurance protects individuals and corporations from events related to kidnapping, including extortion. Some scenarios that may be addressed specifically with a kidnap insurance policy also include child abductions, hijacking, hostage situations, and wrongful detention. Policies may often be bundled with protection for several other related perils, which is why it's often referred to as kidnap and ransom insurance (K&R) insurance or as kidnap, ransom, and extortion insurance.
 Although it sounds exotic, kidnap insurance is much more common as more companies operate with a larger global footprint. 
Coverage is more likely to be used for individuals or companies that operate in high-risk areas. These areas tend to have higher rates of crime and a history of kidnapping workers who are employed by multinational firms. Some of the common high-risk areas include Nigeria, Haiti, and Venezuela. Companies that operate in certain industries may also pose a higher risk—oil and gas companies, mining companies, government contractors, maritime operations, and even television and movie production companies.
 
So how does this kind of insurance work? An insurance company's underwriters first assess the amount of coverage a corporation or individual may require based on a few different factors including:
 
A claim must be filed by the insured party in order for the insurance to kick in. Policyholders are compensated for any losses related to any ransom paid, as well as medical expenses, counseling, or for the accidental death of the kidnap victim. They may also be reimbursed for the cost associated with security services, loss of revenue, and fees related to public relations (PR) or crisis management services.
 
Maintaining coverage such as kidnap insurance is a good way for companies to fulfill their duty of care obligations when they have global operations that require workers to have a physical presence in dangerous areas or to engage in risky situations. Duty of care obligations is a group of legal and moral responsibilities dictating that an employer must take steps to ensure their workers do not suffer any harm. With this type of policy, many insurers also provide services designed to help lessen the risk. These services may include training related to threat assessment, personal security awareness, and crisis management.
 
Some insurance companies now offer a specific, high-tech type of coverage known as cyber extortion coverage. This type of coverage may help with any costs associated with assessing and preventing cyber threats, along with investigations to evaluate the risk of cyber threats. As ransomware and other cyber-attacks increase, this type of protection becomes much more appealing to individuals and businesses—particularly those that handle sensitive, valuable, or private data. 
