
Pro forma, a Latin term that means “for the sake of form” or “as a matter of form”, is a method of calculating financial results using certain projections or presumptions.
 
The presumptions about hypothetical conditions that occurred in the past and/ or may occur in the future are used to project the most likely outcome for corporate results in reports known as pro forma financial statements. For instance, a budget is a variation of a pro forma financial statement as it anticipates, based on certain assumptions, the inflow of projected revenues and the outflow of funds for a defined future period, usually a fiscal year.
 
Essentially, pro forma statements present expected corporate results to outsiders and often feature in investment proposals. A pro forma income statement is a financial statement that uses the pro forma calculation method, mainly to draw potential investors' focus to specific figures when a company issues an earnings announcement. Companies may also design pro forma statements to assess the potential earnings value of a proposed business change, such as an acquisition or a merger.
 
Investors should be aware that a company’s pro forma financial statements may hold figures or calculations that are not in compliance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Sometimes, pro forma figures differ vastly from those generated within a GAAP framework, as pro forma results will make adjustments to GAAP numbers to highlight important aspects of the company's operating performance.﻿﻿
 
In financial accounting, pro forma refers to a report of the company's earnings that excludes unusual or nonrecurring transactions. Excluded expenses could include declining investment values, restructuring costs, and adjustments made on the company’s balance sheet that fix accounting errors from prior years.
 
In managerial accounting, meanwhile, accountants design financial statements prepared in the pro forma method ahead of a planned transaction such as an acquisition, merger, change in capital structure, or new capital investment. These models forecast the expected result of the proposed transaction, with emphasis placed on estimated net revenues, cash flows, and taxes. Managers are then able to make business decisions based on the potential benefits and costs.
 
Pro forma financials in the United States boomed in the late 1990s when dot-com companies used the method to make losses appear like profits or, at a minimum, to reveal much greater gains than indicated through U.S. GAAP accounting methods.
 
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) responded by cautioning that publicly traded companies report and make public U.S. GAAP-based financial results as well. The SEC also clarified that it would deem using pro forma results to grossly misconstrue GAAP-based results and mislead investors fraudulent and punishable by law.﻿﻿
 Using pro forma results to grossly misconstrue GAAP-based results and mislead investors is deemed by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to be fraudulent and punishable by law. 
Today, there are several places where you can find a boilerplate template for generating a pro forma financial statement, such as the income statement, including Excel spreadsheets that will automatically populate and calculate the correct entries based on your inputs.
 
Still, you may want to know how to create a pro forma income statement by hand. The steps are:
 
Here’s a real-life example of a pro forma income statement, courtesy of Tesla Inc.'s (TSLA) unaudited pro forma condensed and consolidated income statement for the year ended December 31, 2016.
 U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission. "Cautionary Advice Regarding the Use of 'Pro Forma' Financial Information in Earnings Releases." Accessed August 12, 2020.