
Property tax is a tax paid on property owned by an individual or other legal entity, such as a corporation. Most commonly, property tax is a real estate ad-valorem tax, which can be considered a regressive tax. It is calculated by a local government where the property is located and paid by the owner of the property. The tax is usually based on the value of the owned property, including land. However, many jurisdictions also tax tangible personal property, such as cars and boats.
 
The local governing body will use the assessed taxes to fund water and sewer improvements, and provide law enforcement, fire protection, education, road and highway construction, libraries, and other services that benefit the community.﻿﻿ Deeds of reconveyance do not interact with property taxes.
 
Property tax rates and the types of properties taxed vary by jurisdiction. When purchasing a property, it is essential to scrutinize the applicable tax laws.
 
In most Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries, immovable property tax represents a low proportion of federal revenue when compared to income taxes and value-added taxes. However, the rate in the United States is substantially higher than in many European countries.﻿﻿ Many empiricists and pundits have called for an increase in property tax rates in developed economies. They argue that the predictability and market-correcting character of the tax encourages both stability and proper development of the real estate.
 
The amount owners owe in property tax is determined by multiplying the property tax rate by the current market value of the lands in question. Most taxing authorities will recalculate the tax rate annually. Almost all property taxes are levied on real property, which is legally defined and classified by the state apparatus. Real property includes the land, structures, or other fixed buildings.﻿﻿
 
Ultimately, property owners are subject to the rates determined by the municipal government. A municipality will hire a tax assessor who assesses the local property. In some areas, the tax assessor may be an elected official. The assessor will assign property taxes to owners based on current fair market values. This value becomes the assessed value for the home.
 
The payment schedule of property taxes varies by locality. In almost all local property tax codes, there are mechanisms by which the owner can discuss their tax rate with the assessor or formally contest the rate. When property taxes are left unpaid, the taxing authority may assign a lien against the property. Buyers should always complete a full review of outstanding liens before purchasing any property.
 
People often use the terms property tax and real estate tax interchangeably. And it's partially true: Real estate tax is a property tax. However, that's not true the other way around. Not all property taxes are real estate taxes.
 
As noted above, in addition to real estate, many jurisdictions also levy property taxes against tangible personal property. According to a 2019 report by the Tax Foundation, 43 states tax tangible personal property.﻿﻿ Both types of property are tax deductible if you file Schedule A with your income taxes. However, since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the amount of state and local taxes (SALT) taxpayers could deduct on their federal income taxes fell from no limit to $10,000 per year for either married couples or single taxpayers.﻿﻿ Those in the married filing separately category have a $5,000 cap.﻿﻿
 
So here's the difference: Real estate taxes are taxes on real property only; property taxes can include both real property and tangible personal property.
 U.S. Census Bureau. "Local Governments in Northeast More Reliant on Property Taxes than South and West." Accessed Nov. 26, 2019. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. "Tax on Property." Accessed Nov. 26, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "1.14.4 Personal Property Management." Accessed Nov. 26, 2019. Tax Foundation. "States Should Continue to Reform Taxes on Tangible Personal Property." Accessed Dec. 18, 2019. Tax Foundation. "Testimony before the House Ways and Means Select Revenue Measures Subcommittee." Accessed Dec. 18, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "With New SALT Limit, IRS Explains Tax Treatment of State and Local Tax Refunds." Accessed Dec. 18, 2019.