
The term distributable net income (DNI) refers to income allocated from a trust to its beneficiaries. Distributable net income is the maximum amount received by a unitholder or a beneficiary that is taxable. This figure is capped to ensure there is no instance of double taxation. Any amount above the DNI is, therefore, tax-free.
 
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) considers distributable net income to be an estimate of the economic value that stems from a distribution to a beneficiary. A distribution is a payment made from a fund—an estate or an income trust—to a beneficiary. DNI gives beneficiaries a reliable income source while minimizing the amount of income taxes paid by the trust.
 
Just like individuals, estates and non-grantor trusts must file income tax returns. Non-grantor trusts are still funded by the grantor—the person or entity that creates the trust. But this kind of trust functions entirely on its own from the grantor who gives up control of the assets to the trust. The income these trusts report is taxed at either the entity or beneficiary level. Which level is taxed depends on whether it is allocated to the principal amount or to the distributable income, and whether the amount is distributed to the beneficiaries. 
 
According to U.S. tax code, estates and trusts are allowed to deduct the distributable net income or the sum of the trust income required to be distributed—whichever is less—and other amounts “properly paid or credited or required to be distributed” to beneficiaries to prevent double taxation on income. An income trust recognizes distributable net income as an amount transferred to unitholders. With an estate trust, it’s the amount to be distributed to a beneficiary.
 Estates and trusts are allowed to deduct the distributable net income or the sum of the trust income required to be distributed—whichever is less. 
As noted above, when a trust calculates the distributable net income, it essentially prevents any instance of double taxation of the funds issued by a trust. The formula to calculate the figure is as follows:
 
An important point to note here is that in instances where there are capital losses, that figure replaces the capital gains and is added to the formula instead.
 
In order to calculate the taxable income, you need to add the interest income, dividends, and capital gains, then subtract any fees and tax exemptions. Unlike the DNI calculation, capital gains are added in the taxable income formula while capital losses are subtracted.
 
Distributable net income shouldn't be confused with net income—both are two different things. While DNI is the income distributed from a trust to its beneficiary or beneficiaries, net income is used by a business to calculate its earnings per share (EPS)—the total profit of a company divided by the number of outstanding shares of its common stock—and is also referred to as net earnings. Net income appears on a company's balance sheet and helps indicate how profitable it is. In order to calculate its net income, corporations subtract any general and administrative expenses, operating expenses, interest, taxes, other expenses, and the cost of goods sold (COGS) from the total amount of sales.
 
Net income can also be used to refer to an individual's take-home pay. This is the amount of money a person receives after any deductions are taken from their paychecks such as taxes, health care, disability, insurance, and any other expenses. A person's net income is the opposite of their gross income—the amount they receive before any deductions.
 
Here's an example of how DNI is calculated using a fictional trust we'll call Trust ABC. Let's say Trust ABC reported total income of $40,000. A total of $10,000 of this was interest income, while the remaining $30,000 was derived from dividends. Fees charged by the trust amounted to $3,000, while the trust realized a capital gain of $15,000. An exemption of $200 applied to the trust.
 
If we use the formula above, the trust's taxable income is $51,800:
 
We can then use this taxable income figure to calculate the DNI, which would be $37,000:
