
A fixed cost is a cost that does not change with an increase or decrease in the amount of goods or services produced or sold. Fixed costs are expenses that have to be paid by a company, independent of any specific business activities. In general, companies can have two types of costs, fixed costs or variable costs, which together result in their total costs. Shutdown points tend to be applied to reduce fixed costs.
 
Companies have a wide range of different costs associated with their business. These costs are broken out by indirect, direct, and capital costs on the income statement and notated as either short-term or long-term liabilities on the balance sheet. Together both fixed costs and variable costs make up the total cost structure of a company. Cost analysts are responsible for analyzing both fixed and variable costs through various types of cost structure analysis. In general, costs are a key factor influencing total profitability.
 
Companies have some flexibility in breaking down costs on their financial statements. As such fixed costs can be allocated throughout the income statement. The proportion of variable vs. fixed costs a company incurs and their allocations can depend on the industry they are in. Variable costs are costs directly associated with production and therefore change depending on business output. Fixed costs are usually negotiated for a specified time period and do not change with production levels. Fixed costs, however, can decrease on a per unit basis when they are associated with the direct cost portion of the income statement, fluctuating in the breakdown of costs of goods sold.
 
Fixed costs are usually established by contract agreements or schedules. These are base costs involved in operating a business comprehensively. Once established, fixed costs do not change over the life of an agreement or cost schedule. A company starting a new business would likely begin with fixed costs for rent and management salaries. All types of businesses have fixed cost agreements that they monitor regularly. While these fixed costs may change over time, the change is not related to production levels but rather new contractual agreements or schedules. Examples of fixed costs include rental lease payments, salaries, insurance, property taxes, interest expenses, depreciation, and potentially some utilities.
 
Companies can associate both fixed and variable costs when analyzing costs per unit. As such, cost of goods sold can include both variable and fixed costs. Comprehensively, all costs directly associated with the production of a good are summed collectively and subtracted from revenue to arrive at gross profit. Variable and fixed cost accounting will vary for each company depending on the costs they are working with. Economies of scale can also be a factor for companies who can produce large quantities of goods. Fixed costs can be a contributor to better economies of scale because fixed costs can decrease per unit when larger quantities are produced. Fixed costs that may be directly associated with production will vary by company but can include costs like direct labor and rent.
 
Fixed costs are also allocated in the indirect expense section of the income statement which leads to operating profit. Depreciation is one common fixed cost that is recorded as an indirect expense. Companies create a depreciation expense schedule for asset investments with values falling over time. For example, a company might buy machinery for a manufacturing assembly line that is expensed over time using depreciation. Another primary fixed, indirect cost is salaries for management.
 
Companies will also have interest payments as fixed costs which are a factor for net income. Fixed interest expenses are deducted from operating profit to arrive at net profit.
 
Any fixed costs on the income statement are also accounted for on the balance sheet and cash flow statement. Fixed costs on the balance sheet may be either short-term or long-term liabilities. Finally, any cash paid for the expenses of fixed costs is shown on the cash flow statement. In general, the opportunity to lower fixed costs can benefit a company’s bottom line by reducing expenses and increasing profit.
 
Cost Structure Management
 
In addition to financial statement reporting, most companies will closely follow their cost structures through independent cost structure statements and dashboards. Independent cost structure analysis helps a company fully understand its variable vs. fixed costs and how they affect different parts of the business as well as the total business overall. Many companies have cost analysts dedicated solely to monitoring and analyzing the fixed and variable costs of a business.
 
Ratios
 
Fixed cost ratio: The fixed cost ratio is a simple ratio that divides fixed costs by net sales to understand the proportion of fixed costs involved in production.
 
Fixed charge coverage ratio: The fixed charge coverage ratio is a type of solvency metric that helps analyze a company’s ability to pay its fixed-charge obligations. The fixed charge coverage ratio is calculated from the following equation:
 
EBIT + fixed charges before tax / fixed charges before tax + interest
 
Breakeven analysis: Breakeven analysis involves using both fixed and variable costs to identify a production level in which revenue will equal costs. This can be an important part of cost structure analysis. A company’s breakeven production quantity is calculated by:
 
Breakeven quantity = fixed costs / (sales price per unit – variable cost per unit)
 
A company’s breakeven analysis can be important for decisions on fixed and variable costs. Breakeven analysis also influences the price at which a company chooses to sell its products.
 
Operating leverage: Operating leverage is another cost structure metric used in cost structure management. The proportion of fixed to variable costs will influence a company’s operating leverage. Higher fixed costs help operating leverage to increase. With a higher operating leverage, companies can produce more profit per additional unit produced.
 
Operating leverage = [Q(P-V)] / [Q(P-V)-F]
 
Where:
 
Q = number of units
 
P = price per unit
 
V = variable cost per unit
 
F = fixed costs
