
For sale by owner or FSBO is a term that refers to a specific method of selling a property. In an FSBO listing, the owner sells the property without the use of an agent or a broker. Sellers typically choose to sell their home on their own to avoid paying the real estate agent the commission for the transaction.
 
For sale by owner is when a property owner chooses to sell their property on their own without an agent or broker to facilitate the sale. FSBO transactions are most commonly associated with the real estate market. Sellers that choose to sell their home on their own can potentially save thousands of dollars in real estate commissions. Although selling via FSBO can be a daunting task, a seller can sell their home on their own. However, the seller assumes all responsibility and ownership of the selling process.
 
Although each property and type of real estate transaction can have varying steps involved, below are a few of the most common responsibilities and tasks for the seller in an FSBO transaction.
 
There are services available that can help sellers through the FSBO process. For example, a Multiple Listing Service (MLS)–which is a service connecting brokers and sellers to show their listings for sale–can help an individual determine a sale price. The MLS also has information on marketing a home as well as how to deal with the legal paperwork and contracts for a flat fee.
 
When an individual homeowner chooses to sell a house, traditionally they hire a real estate agent or broker to handle the sale. Going through an agent or broker can save a homeowner a lot of time. However, commissions can reduce the seller's profits, whereby the average commission runs around 6% of the home's selling price.
 
For example, if you sell a home for $500,000, the buyer's and seller's agents would receive $30,000 of that sale (6% * $500,000). If you choose to handle the sale yourself, you will get to keep the entire $500,000. If a seller is comfortable with the selling process and knowledgeable about real estate transactions, they can potentially save thousands of dollars.
 
Savings thousands of dollars in commissions can be tempting. However, it's important to remember that when a seller doesn't employ a real estate agent, the seller assumes all the responsibilities of completing the transaction.
 
If the seller is unfamiliar with the home buying and selling process, any mistake can be quite costly. For example, if when determining the asking price, the seller asks for too much, it could lead to a lost sale as potential buyers avoid the home. However, if the seller asks for too low of an asking price, the lost money that could have been earned from the sale might be more than the amount saved from avoiding the real estate commissions. In some cases, an appraiser might be needed or even requested by the buyer.
 
Also, there can be legal risks with selling the home via FSBO if the legal documents are not drawn up properly or if issues about the home aren't adequately disclosed. Depending on the experience of the seller, avoiding the commission can be a wise financial decision. However, those who have little knowledge of real estate transactions can find the situation stressful and may be better off using a qualified real estate agent.
