
Forbearance is a temporary postponement of mortgage payments. It is a form of repayment relief granted by the lender or creditor in lieu of forcing a property into foreclosure. Loan owners and loan insurers may be willing to negotiate forbearance options because the losses generated by property foreclosure typically fall on them.
 
Forbearance can also occur with other types of loans, such as can be the case with student loans. As an example, the U.S. Congress recently passed the CARES Act to address the economic fallout from COVID-19. The package included provisions for student loan forbearance. Some state governments have also enacted their own regulations related to forbearance amid the pandemic
 
Forbearance provides the borrower time to repay delinquent mortgage sums. This is advantageous to the struggling borrower, but offering forbearance also benefits the loan owner, such as a bank, which frequently loses money on foreclosure after paying the fees associated with the process. However, loan servicers, which collect payments but do not own the loans, may be less willing to work with borrowers on forbearance relief because they do not bear as much financial risk.
 
The terms of a forbearance agreement are negotiated between the borrower and the lender. The opportunity for such an agreement depends on the likelihood that the borrower will be able to resume monthly mortgage repayments once the temporary forbearance is over. The lender may approve a full reduction of the borrower's payment or only a partial one, depending upon the extent of the borrower's need and the lender's confidence in the borrower's ability to catch up at a later date.
 
In some cases, the lender grants the borrower a full moratorium on making mortgage payments for the forbearance period. Other times, the borrower is required to make interest payments but not pay down the principal. In still other cases, the borrower pays only part of the interest with the unpaid portion resulting in negative amortization. Another forbearance option is for the lender to reduce the borrower's interest rate on a temporary basis.
 
Being awarded forbearance on a mortgage requires contacting the lender, explaining the situation, and receiving approval. Borrowers with a history of making payments on time are more likely to be granted this option. The borrower must also demonstrate the cause for repayment postponement, such as financial difficulties associated with a major illness or the loss of a job.
 
A borrower who worked the same job for 10 years and never missed a mortgage payment during that time, for example, is a good candidate to receive forbearance following a layoff, particularly if the borrower has in-demand skills and is likely to land a comparable job within weeks or months. Conversely, a lender is less likely to grant forbearance to a laid-off borrower with a spotty employment history or a track record of missing mortgage payments.
 
Forbearance assistance is now being offered to mortgage borrowers affected by COVID-19, the illness caused by the novel coronavirus. On March 19, 2020, Governor Andrew Cuomo announced that New York mortgage servicers would be directed to provide 90-day relief to mortgage holders experiencing financial hardship.﻿﻿ Fannie Mae is also offering assistance for affected homeowners with Fannie Mae-owned mortgages. Here are the Fannie Mae guidelines for single-family mortgages:﻿﻿
 
Homeowners can find out if they have a mortgage that is owned by Fannie Mae or call Fannie Mae at 1-800-232-6643 for more information.
 
Freddie Mac has announced similar actions to protect single-family homeowners with Freddie Mac-owned mortgages who are affected by COVID-19. Relief includes:﻿﻿
 
Visit MyHomebyFreddieMac for more information and a mortgage look-up tool.
 Governor Andrew M. Cuomo. "Governor Cuomo Signs Executive Order Mandating Businesses That Require In-Office Personnel to Decrease In-Office Workforce by 75 Percent." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Fannie Mae. "Fannie Mae Assistance Options for Homeowners Impacted by COVID-19." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. FHFA. "FHFA Extends Foreclosure and Eviction Moratorium." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Freddie Mac. "Freddie Mac Announces Enhanced Relief for Borrowers Impacted by COVID-19." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020.