
A foreign direct investment (FDI) is an investment made by a firm or individual in one country into business interests located in another country. Generally, FDI takes place when an investor establishes foreign business operations or acquires foreign business assets in a foreign company. However, FDIs are distinguished from portfolio investments in which an investor merely purchases equities of foreign-based companies.
 
Foreign direct investments are commonly made in open economies that offer a skilled workforce and above-average growth prospects for the investor, as opposed to tightly regulated economies. Foreign direct investment frequently involves more than just a capital investment. It may include provisions of management or technology as well. The key feature of foreign direct investment is that it establishes either effective control of or at least substantial influence over the decision-making of a foreign business.
 
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which tracks expenditures by foreign direct investors into U.S. businesses, reported total FDI into U.S. businesses of $4.46 trillion at the end of 2019. Manufacturing represented the top industry, with just over 40% of FDI for 2019. ﻿﻿
 Countries rely on the U.S. using their manufacturing capabilities, where the U.S. provides a large benefit to their economy when utilized. 
Foreign direct investments can be made in a variety of ways, including the opening of a subsidiary or associate company in a foreign country, acquiring a controlling interest in an existing foreign company, or by means of a merger or joint venture with a foreign company.
 
The threshold for a foreign direct investment that establishes a controlling interest, per guidelines established by the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), is a minimum 10% ownership stake in a foreign-based company. However, that definition is flexible, as there are instances where effective controlling interest in a firm can be established with less than 10% of the company's voting shares.﻿﻿
 
Foreign direct investments are commonly categorized as being horizontal, vertical or conglomerate. A horizontal direct investment refers to the investor establishing the same type of business operation in a foreign country as it operates in its home country, for example, a cell phone provider based in the United States opening stores in China. 
 
A vertical investment is one in which different but related business activities from the investor's main business are established or acquired in a foreign country, such as when a manufacturing company acquires an interest in a foreign company that supplies parts or raw materials required for the manufacturing company to make its products.
 
A conglomerate type of foreign direct investment is one where a company or individual makes a foreign investment in a business that is unrelated to its existing business in its home country. Since this type of investment involves entering an industry in which the investor has no previous experience, it often takes the form of a joint venture with a foreign company already operating in the industry.
 
Examples of foreign direct investments include mergers, acquisitions, retail, services, logistics, and manufacturing, among others. Foreign direct investments and the laws governing them can be pivotal to a company's growth strategy. 
 
In 2017, for example, U.S.-based Apple announced a $507.1 million investment to boost its research and development work in China, Apple's third-largest market behind the Americas and Europe. The announced investment relayed CEO Tim Cook's bullishness toward the Chinese market despite a 12% year-over-year decline in Apple's Greater China revenue in the quarter preceding the announcement. 
 
China's economy has been fueled by an influx of FDI targeting the nation's high-tech manufacturing and services, which according to China's Ministry of Commerce, grew 11.1% and 20.4% year over year, respectively, in the first half of 2017.﻿﻿ Meanwhile, relaxed FDI regulations in India now allows 100% foreign direct investment in single-brand retail without government approval.﻿﻿ The regulatory decision reportedly facilitates Apple's desire to open a physical store in the Indian market. Thus far, the firm's iPhones have only been available through third-party physical and online retailers.
 U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). "Direct Investment by Country and Industry, 2019." Accessed July 30, 2020. OECD. "Foreign Direct Investment Statistics: Explanatory Notes." Accessed July 30, 2020. Ministry of Commerce People's Republic of China. "Regular Press Conference of the Ministry of Commerce (July 13, 2017)." Accessed July 30, 2020. Government of India Ministry of Commerce and Industry. "Starred Question No. 53 to Be Answered on Wednesday, the 7th February, 2018. Allowing 100 Percent FDI in Single Brand Retail Trade." Accessed July 30, 2020.