
Foreclosure is the legal process by which a lender attempts to recover the amount owed on a defaulted loan by taking ownership of and selling the mortgaged property. Typically, default is triggered when a borrower misses a specific number of monthly payments, but it can also happen when the borrower fails to meet other terms in the mortgage document.
 
The foreclosure process derives its legal basis from a mortgage or deed of trust contract, which gives the lender the right to use a property as collateral in case the borrower fails to uphold the terms of the mortgage document.
 
Although the process varies by state, the foreclosure process generally begins when a borrower defaults or misses at least one mortgage payment. The lender then sends a missed payment notice that indicates they haven't received that month's payment.
 
If the borrower misses two payments, the lender sends a demand letter. While this is more serious than a missed payment notice, the lender may still be willing to make arrangements for the borrower to catch up on the missed payments.
 
The lender sends a notice of default after 90 days of missed payments. The loan is handed over to the lender's foreclosure department, and the borrower typically has another 90 days to settle the payments and reinstate the loan (this is called the reinstatement period).
 
At the end of the reinstatement period, the lender will begin to foreclose if the homeowner has not made up the missed payments.
 If your mortgage is backed by the federal government and you are behind on your mortgage because of a COVID-19-related financial hardship, you may be eligible to suspend payments for as long as 12 months with no late fees. 
Each state has laws that govern the foreclosure process, including the notices a lender must post publicly, the homeowner's options for bringing the loan current and avoiding foreclosure, and the timeline and process for selling the property.
 
A foreclosure—as in the actual act of a lender seizing a property—is typically the final step after a lengthy pre-foreclosure process. Before foreclosure, the lender may offer several alternatives to avoid foreclosure, many of which can mediate a foreclosure's negative consequences for both the buyer and the seller.
 
In 22 states—including Florida, Illinois, and New York—judicial foreclosure is the norm. This is where the lender must go through the courts to get permission to foreclose by proving the borrower is delinquent. If the foreclosure is approved, the local sheriff auctions the property to the highest bidder to try to recoup what the bank is owed, or the bank becomes the owner and sells the property through the traditional route to recoup its losses.
 
The other 28 states—including Arizona, California, Georgia, and Texas—primarily use non-judicial foreclosure, also called the power of sale. This type of foreclosure tends to be faster than a judicial foreclosure, and it does not go through the courts unless the homeowner sues the lender.
 
Properties foreclosed in the first quarter of 2020 (the most recent data available) had spent an average of 673 days in the foreclosure process, according to the U.S. Foreclosure Market Report from ATTOM Data Solutions, a property data provider. That's down 19% from an average of 834 days for properties foreclosed in the third quarter of 2019.﻿﻿
 
The average number of days varies by state because of varying laws and foreclosure timelines. The states with the longest average number of days for properties foreclosed in the first quarter of 2020 were:﻿﻿
 
States with the shortest average times to foreclose during the same period were:
 
The graph below shows the quarterly average days to foreclosure since the first quarter of 2007.﻿﻿
 
Even if a borrower has missed a payment or two, there may still be ways to avoid foreclosure. Some alternatives include:
 Mortgage lending discrimination is illegal. If you think you've been discriminated against based on race, religion, sex, marital status, use of public assistance, national origin, disability, or age, there are steps you can take. One such step is to file a report to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
If a property fails to sell at a foreclosure auction or if it otherwise never went through one, lenders—often banks—typically take ownership of the property and may add it to an accumulated portfolio of foreclosed properties, also called real-estate owned (REO).
 
Foreclosed properties are typically easily accessible on banks' websites. Such properties can be attractive to real estate investors because in some cases, banks sell them at a discount to their market value, which of course, in turn, negatively affects the lender.
 
For the borrower, a foreclosure appears on a credit report within a month or two—and stays there for seven years from the date of the first missed payment. After seven years, the foreclosure is deleted from the borrower's credit report.
 ATTOM Data Solutions. "U.S. Foreclosure Activity Below Pre-Recession Levels in 61 Percent of U.S. Markets." Accessed Sept. 5, 2020.