
Wanton disregard is a legal term that denotes an individual's extreme lack of care for the well-being or rights of another individual.
 
It is most commonly used in an insurance context involving negligence to describe reckless behavior that has led to damages or injury. Wanton disregard is a serious accusation that indicates that a person behaved extremely recklessly.
 
When an individual fails to employ reasonable care in their actions, it constitutes negligence. Yet not all negligence is the same; there are degrees of negligence. 
 
Wanton disregard in the legal sense is not always deliberately malicious, though it is more serious than mere carelessness. In a lawsuit, wanton disregard might result in punitive damages depending on the severity of the situation and state laws. Wanton disregard may also be referred to as wanton conduct and may be more formally be expressed as willful and wanton disregard.
 
A financial advisor at a large firm uses the company's online database to store sensitive information about his clients. The database is hacked and a client's identity is stolen. The client tells his financial adviser that he thinks his identity was stolen through the financial adviser's firm. The financial adviser notifies the appropriate people within the company, but they do not correct the problem. This would be considered wanton disregard because while the company is not intentionally or maliciously exposing its clients' sensitive financial data, it is recklessly ignoring a problem that it has been made aware of.
 
Another example of wanton disregard would be a supervisor instructing a subordinate to service a piece of machinery while it was still running. A reasonable person would know that this is unreasonably dangerous behavior. Any injury that resulted from such an action would be evidence of wanton disregard. For some case law examples involving wanton disregard, see Reflections on Willful, Wanton, Reckless and Gross Negligence from the Louisiana Law Review.
