
The Wisconsin School of Business is part of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The Wisconsin School of Business offers undergraduate and graduate programs in a variety of business disciplines, including accounting, finance, marketing, real estate and risk management.
 
Located in Madison, Wis., the Wisconsin School of Business was established in 1900. In 2018, the school's graduate program was ranked number 37 by U.S. News & World Report.
 
Its enrollment was approximately 2,500 undergraduate and 500 graduate-level students. As with most graduate business programs, there are more male than female students, with 65% being male and 35% being female. Annual tuition for the full-time program as of the 2017-2018 school year was $17,452 for in-state students and $35,316 for out-of-state students. The cost for the entire executive MBA is the same for both, at $37,622.
 
The full-time master of business administration (MBA) degree at the Wisconsin School of Business can be focused on one of 10 different areas ranging from risk management and insurance to marketing research or real estate. Professionals who want to continue their education can enroll in an evening or executive MBA program, specifically designed for those who have already started their careers. Master’s degrees include Integrated Master of Accountancy, Graduate Master of Accountancy, M.S. in Finance and Global Real Estate Master.
 
The school also offers doctoral programs in:
 
As with many other full-time MBA programs, the Wisconsin School of Business has seen a significant decline in enrollment of full-time MBA students as they migrate to more flexible options, such as part-time evening and weekend or executive programs. In October 2017, the school announced plans to suspend new enrollment in the program for one year while it decided what to do. The plan to suspend enrollment was dropped just days later in response to criticism from current students and alumni and a petition with more than 700 signatures. The dean of the school, Anne Massey, apologized to the students and faculty and said they would continue to explore ways to expand the program and keep it relevant.
 
The University of Wisconsin, founded as the first public university in 1848, had more than 43,000 students as of 2017. Undergraduates have access to classes in 136 majors, and more than 250 graduate and doctoral programs are offered.
