
A 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation is a type of charitable organization that the Internal Revenue Service recognizes as tax-exempt. This type of corporation does not pay income tax on its earnings or on the donations it receives.﻿﻿
 
Any time taxpayers make a donation to a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, they can reduce their taxable income by the amount of their donation if they itemize their deductions on their federal income tax return. This incentive encourages private charity and makes it easier for nonprofits to raise money.﻿﻿
 
If you've ever wanted to raise money for a cause on your own terms, you might want to start a 501(c)(3). This article describes what you should consider before you decide and tells you how to get started if you decide to move forward.
 
Federal tax law states that if you want to operate as a 501(c)(3), your organization must exclusively pursue an activity in one of the following categories:
 
You should also be sure that your organization is not designed to profit an individual and that it provides a public benefit.
 
Once you've determined that you want to proceed and that your organization roughly meets the IRS requirements, it's time to start dealing with the red tape. A lawyer can provide personalized guidance and help you avoid costly mistakes, but some people do manage on their own.
 
Corporations are formed at the state level, so you'll need to find out what the procedure is to form a corporation in the state where your organization will be based. The steps vary by state but will generally include the following:
 
In addition to following the official, required steps, it's not a bad idea to make a business plan, just like you would if you were starting a for-profit business. Although your organization will be a nonprofit, you will still have to operate in the black if you want to keep it running.
 
Nonprofits are allowed to make money; they just have to use those profits to further the organization's public purpose. By contrast, a private corporation exists to enrich its employees, managers, and shareholders.
 
After meeting your state's requirements for forming a corporation, you're ready to apply for tax-exempt status with the IRS.
 
First, you'll need to apply for an employer identification number (EIN). This is a requirement for all tax-exempt organizations, even if they don't have employees. You can apply online through the IRS website, by phone, or by mailing or faxing in Form SS-4, Application for Employer Identification Number.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Next, complete and submit Form 1023, Application for Recognition of Exemption Under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. The information that you include on this form will serve as the basis of the IRS's decision of whether to grant your organization tax-exempt status. Set aside plenty of time for this task; the main application is 11 pages long and quite detailed.﻿﻿
 
Also, depending on the type of organization you are forming, you will also need to fill out one of the attached schedules (e.g., Schedule A for churches; Schedule B for schools, colleges, and universities; etc.) The IRS estimates the time to complete Form 1023 at about 90 hours for recordkeeping requirements, 5 hours to learn about the form, almost 10 hours to prepare the form, and another hour to copy, assemble, and mail the form. That's not including the schedules.
 IRS Form 1023 helps ensure that you've included all required information in your application and will help to prevent delays in processing. 
Submit your application. The IRS will let you know if it needs more information or if your form has been forwarded for review. Once the IRS has all of the information it requires, it will issue a determination letter either granting or denying tax-exempt status to your organization. The evaluation process usually takes three to five months. If you are denied, you can appeal.﻿﻿
 
If your organization gets approved for tax-exempt status at the federal level, that's great. Next, you'll need to make sure your organization will also be tax-exempt at the state and local levels so it doesn't have to pay state corporate income tax, sales tax, or property tax.
 
Requirements vary by state, but your IRS approval may be all your organization needs to also be recognized as a nonprofit at the state level.
 
Once you've met your state's requirements for operating as a nonprofit, you'll need to get any permits or licenses required to operate your business and make sure to comply with building codes and other local regulations.
 
Before you start operating, familiarize yourself with corporate requirements, such as holding meetings, keeping minutes, and filing information returns.
 
Once you've been approved at every level, there's still work to do. Maintaining your nonprofit status is an ongoing process, and the consequences are severe if you don't follow the rules, following a list of self-imposed guidelines you need to follow on a regular basis:
 
If you have a sizeable number of employees, consider starting a qualified retirement plan. These plans resemble 401(k) plans in many respects but are specially designed for nonprofit entities.﻿﻿
 
Starting a 501(c)(3) can be an exhausting process. Before you tackle the challenge, weigh the pros and cons of meeting all the legal and tax requirements of forming and operating an official nonprofit organization. But it may well be worth it; people may donate more than they otherwise would because of the tax exemption and perceived increase in legitimacy 501(c)(3) status conveys.
 U.S. House of Representatives, Office of the Law Revision Counsel. "26 USC 501: Exemption from tax on corporations, certain trusts, etc." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 506 Charitable Contributions." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Wolters Kluwer. "A Guide to Incorporating Your Business." Pages 8-10. Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Form 1023: EIN Required to Apply for Exemption." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "How to Apply for an EIN." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Form 1023." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Wiley. "A Passion for Giving: Tools and Inspiration for Creating a Charitable Foundation." Page 58. Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Compliance Guide for 501(c)(3) Public Charities." Pages 19-20. Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Form 990 Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Form 990-EZ." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020.  Internal Revenue Service. "Exempt Organizations Annual Reporting Requirements - Form 990, Schedules A and B: Public Charity Support Test." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Compliance Guide for 501(c)(3) Public Charities." Pages 14-19. Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "The Restriction of Political Campaign Intervention by Section 501(c)(3) Tax-Exempt Organizations." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Overview of Inurement/Private Benefit Issues in IRC 501(c)(3)." Pages 1-2. Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Lobbying." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Unrelated Business Income Tax." Accessed Feb. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 4484: Plan Feature Comparison Chart: Choose a Retirement Plan." Pages 4, 9 and 11. Accessed Feb. 15, 2020.