
You may have heard that a home equity line of credit (HELOC) is a convenient, flexible, and low-cost way to borrow money. All these statements can be true if you manage your HELOC prudently. Taking out a HELOC, rather than a home equity loan, means that you are only paying interest on the amount of your line of credit that you're actually using, rather than on all the money you are eligible to borrow. But if you aren't careful, a HELOC can become very expensive and get you into financial trouble. Here are five ways a HELOC can hurt you.
 
HELOCs generally have variable interest rates. The interest rate is based on a benchmark rate, such as the federal funds rate, plus a margin, which is established by the lender. When interest rates go up, your monthly payment will go up too.﻿﻿
 
There is no way to predict when increases will happen or how much they will be. Your new monthly payment could be unaffordable. Getting behind on those payments can lower your credit score—not to mention increasing the interest you owe. The fine print of your HELOC should state a maximum possible interest rate.﻿﻿ However, if your current interest rate is 6% and the maximum is 20%, that information will not be very comforting.
 
Interest rates also affect your long-term total borrowing costs, not just your monthly payments. If your HELOC's interest rate increases before you pay it off, the total cost of what you borrowed the money for goes up. A larger interest payment also means that you have less money for other things, such as paying bills or saving for retirement.
 
One way to combat the risk of higher interest rates is to take out a home equity loan, which has a fixed rate, instead of a HELOC. "In a rising interest-rate environment, it may be better to have a home equity loan to lock in a fixed rate," says Marguerita Cheng, CEO of Blue Ocean Global Wealth. Another possibility is to take advantage of the fixed-rate option that is offered with some HELOCs.﻿﻿
 
However, in exchange for the certainty of a fixed rate, you'll generally pay a slightly higher interest rate than you would on a variable-rate HELOC.﻿﻿ This dynamic is similar to the one between the interest rates for adjustable-rate mortgages and fixed-rate mortgages.﻿﻿
 Most HELOCs have a draw period during which you can access your available credit and make small payments that are often interest-only. After the draw period ends, the loan enters the repayment phase. 
Having a HELOC is similar to having an adjustable-rate mortgage in that your monthly payments can change significantly when interest rates change. It can be difficult to budget or make future financial plans when you cannot predict your monthly payments or total borrowing costs.
 
Of course, some borrowers are comfortable taking on this level of risk, especially in low-interest-rate environments. But if you need a lower level of risk to sleep soundly at night, a home equity loan or fixed-rate option on a HELOC may once again prove to be a better choice.﻿﻿
 
Jonathan Swanburg, investment advisor representative at Tri-Star Advisors, puts it this way:
 Some banks stopped accepting applications for HELOCs during the coronavirus pandemic.﻿﻿ 
Some HELOCs have an option that allows you to make interest-only payments on the money you borrow, during the first few years of the loan. Interest-only payments seem great in the short term because they allow you to borrow a lot of money at what appears to be a low cost.﻿﻿
 
In the long run, the picture is not so rosy. Borrowers face dramatically higher monthly payments once the interest-only period expires, and possibly a balloon payment at the end of the loan term. If you don't budget for these increases—or if your financial situation stays the same or worsens—you may not be able to afford the higher payments.
 
Plus, when you only pay the interest on a loan, the principal remains. The longer you wait to start paying off the principal, the longer you'll be making debt payments. And of course, you can't pay off your loan until you pay off the principal.
 You only pay interest on what you borrow. So if your limit is $30,000, but you’ve only borrowed $10,000, you’ll pay interest on $10,000. 
A low-interest HELOC can seem like a great way to consolidate high-interest debt, like credit card bills. It can even seem like a great way to refinance any debt with a higher interest rate than the HELOC rate, like a car loan.
 
When you extend your repayment terms from a few years to as many as 30 years, the overall cost of your debt may increase even if your interest rate is significantly lower. You'll want to use an online debt consolidation calculator to determine whether you'll come out ahead before considering this move.
 
Another problem is that, again, HELOC interest rates are variable. You might be refinancing at a lower rate now, only to have that rate increase. When the rate increases, you may no longer be coming out ahead.
 
Debt consolidation with a HELOC can also cause problems for people who lack financial discipline. These people tend to run up their credit card balances again after using the HELOC money to pay them off. Then, they end up having more debt than they started with, and the problem they were trying to solve grows into a larger problem.
 
A HELOC costs little or nothing to establish. Better yet, the annual fee to have the funds available is usually no more than $100.﻿﻿ Furthermore, interest payments are tax-deductible under certain circumstances, just like mortgage interest.﻿﻿ To top it off, accessing the money is as simple as writing a check or using a debit card.
 
HELOCs make tens of thousands of dollars readily available to you, and spending it feels just like making any other purchase, but with tax benefits. Under these conditions, it can be easy to rely on a HELOC to pay for purchases that your monthly income can't cover.
 
Getting into the habit of living beyond your means is dangerous. It eats away at your savings and makes it extra difficult to get by if your financial situation changes for the worse.
 
You should only borrow money for purchases that will improve your financial situation in the long run. "HELOCs can be very valuable if used for housing expenses only. Remodel or home improvements are best," says Elyse Foster, founder of Harbor Wealth Management. Other than that, you should live below your means so you can cover emergencies without going into debt.
 
If you decide to take out a HELOC, don't let it get you into trouble.
 Federal Trade Commission. “Home Equity Loans and Credit Lines.” Accessed June 10, 2020. Federal Trade Commission. “Shopping for a Mortgage.” Accessed June 10, 2020. HousingWire. “Wells Fargo joins Chase in halting HELOCs.” Accessed June 10, 2020. Bank of America. “Make the Equity in Your Home Work for You.” Accessed June 10, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. “Publication 936 (2019), Home Mortgage Interest Deduction.” Accessed June 10, 2020.