
The process referred to as "flipping," has long been popular among real estate investors, but can be applied to just about any in-demand item from hand lotion to handbags. As Christmas approaches, parents and grandparents begin a mad scramble to track down and purchase the year's hottest toys.
 
The hottest-selling toys of the year become like long-stem red roses on Valentine's Day. Potential buyers equate them with love and will do nearly anything to get them. Savvy sellers know this and take advantage of the supply and demand to put a little extra jingle in their pockets, and they know just how to do it.
 
If buying a shopping cart full of the most popular toys and reselling them at a profit sounds like a good idea to you, get an early start on your plan. While Black Friday marks the official kick-off of the holiday shopping season, you can actually begin to plan your toy sales strategy long before November arrives.
 
In fact, late August is when Walmart, the nation's largest retailer, publishes a list of what they believe will be the upcoming season's most popular toys.﻿﻿ Reading over these lists is a great place to start your research, as it gives you specific items that you can begin to watch or buy.
 
When it comes to making your purchases, your key objective is to identify popular items that can be resold at a higher price than what you paid for them.
 
There are a variety of strategies you can use, including:
 
Once you've made your potential shopping list, figuring out the current selling price is easy. Just look the item up on eBay, Amazon, Craigslist and just about everywhere else online buyers and sellers come together to do business.
 
With your recently purchase goods in hand and a good idea of the profit you can make, it's time to start selling. While eBay is the venue of choice for many sellers, it's not the only game in town, as Craigslist and other similar sites also provide potential outlets. Amazon, the other big-name sales site, implements seasonal restrictions if you haven't already established yourself as a vendor.
 
The chance to make a buck doesn't have to end on December 26. If you don't manage to score this year, put the leftover items in your closet and wait until next year. Many items enjoy a multi-year run of popularity that leads to seasonal shortages. The very same items that were hot sellers this year may be in demand again next year.
 Christmas toys do not need to be sold only in December. Listing sites like Craigslist and eBay mean your item can be listed year round for free. 
If the next year doesn't bring you any luck, leave the items in their original packages and put them in the closet for 20 years or so. It's a strategy that has worked out well for owners of certain versions of popular toys such as Barbie, Beanie Babies, Thomas the Tank Engine and just about every action figure from Star Wars.
 
Just be sure to keep the original packaging and any accessories. Buyers want their toys to be in mint condition. Like many other collectibles, the difference in value between an unopened toy in pristine condition and a heavily used toy that shows signs of its age can be substantial.
 
If you decided to try your hand at reselling toys during the holiday season, keep in mind that your initial efforts may put a few extra dollars in your pocket but it isn't likely to generate a big enough income stream to replace your primary source of income.
 
However, your efforts could result in a part-time income all year long. It's even possible that you could expand your efforts to include antique toys, collectibles or choice items picked up at estate sales. With a good eye, you may even be able to turn it into a small business.
 Walmart. "Walmart Announces the Hottest Toys of the Year with the Release of its Top Rated by Kids Toy List." Accessed June 22, 2020.