
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
AAA is a national federation comprising 25 individual clubs throughout the United States and Canada with more than 60 million members. Each AAA auto club is independently run and offers its own insurance options. Available insurance coverages and discounts can vary widely by location.
 
To qualify for auto insurance through AAA, you must have an AAA membership. However, you may find the available discounts and benefits well worth the membership cost.
 Multiple discounts available Loan or lease gap coverage available Robust mobile app Varying coverage and discounts by state Insurance sometimes underwritten by nonaffiliated companies AAA membership required Depending on your location, your insurance policy may be underwritten not by an AAA affiliate but rather by a third-party company that isn’t connected to AAA. 
AAA’s auto insurance options include the following coverages:
 
Liability coverage includes: 
 
Medical coverage includes: 
 
If you are in an accident with a driver who is at fault and uninsured or has insufficient coverage, uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage gives you essential protection.
 
There are two different coverages for your vehicle: 
 
Depending on your AAA auto club, you may be able to add these optional coverages to your policy:
 
Some AAA auto clubs do offer rideshare insurance policies called Transportation Network Company (TNC) coverage. If you drive for a rideshare company such as Uber or Lyft, adding TNC coverage to your personal auto policy can help fill the gap in coverage that your ridesharing company doesn’t provide.
 
With AAA, your price can vary depending on your location and auto club. In general, the following factors affect your premiums:
 
AAA has several discounts that can reduce your monthly insurance premiums. Available discounts can vary by club, so check with your local one to see what discounts you’re eligible to receive. Below are some of the common discounts AAA offers.
 
While AAA offers car insurance throughout the country, insurance coverage is dependent on the individual auto clubs. Some insurance policies are underwritten by AAA affiliates, while others are underwritten by nonaffiliated companies. Check with your local AAA auto club to see what car insurance policies are available in your area.
 
AAA’s car insurance is unique in that its customer service varies based on your local AAA auto club. What kind of support is available, what hours you can reach customer service, and and the level of responsiveness can vary from one club to another. The general AAA customer service number for people interested in joining is 800-564-6222. When you call, the customer service representative will direct you to your local AAA auto club.
 
In the J.D. Power 2019 Auto Claims Satisfaction Study, J.D. Power ranked three AAA-affiliated companies: the Auto Club of Southern California Insurance Group, the Automobile Club Group, and the CSAA Insurance Group. Out of 23 car insurance companies, the Auto Club of Southern California Insurance Group was ranked 10th, the Automobile Club Group was ranked 14th, and the CSAA Insurance Group was ranked 19th in terms of customer satisfaction. All three were rated “about average” for pricing, product offerings, and customer interactions.﻿﻿
 
Auto clubs’ AM Best ratings can also vary widely. We looked at the AM Best rating of the Automobile Club of Southern California, as it’s one of the largest auto clubs in the country. As of 2020 it has an A+ (Superior) rating.﻿﻿
 
If you’re looking for a new car insurer, make sure you pay attention to customer complaints. An easy way to get a snapshot of a company’s performance is to look at its complaint ratio. Each year the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) publishes companies’ complaint ratios, meaning the number of complaints companies receive relative to their market share. Scores of 1.0 are considered average. Anything above 1.0 means the company received more complaints than the industry average, while scores below 1.0 mean the reverse. 
 
Complaint ratios vary based on the AAA auto club and the insurance company that underwrites their insurance policies. These were the complaint ratios of three different AAA affiliates:
 
While the Auto Club Group Insurance Company has a much-better-than-average complaint ratio, the other two companies had worse-than-average ratios, highlighting how the performance of auto clubs can be very different among locations.
 
AAA’s other available insurance products vary by location and include:
 
With AAA car insurance, the claims process is dependent on the type of insurance you have. If your insurance is through an AAA affiliate, you can file a claim online at the AAA website or by calling your auto club. If your insurance policy is through a nonaffiliated company, you’ll have to contact that company directly to inquire about its claims process.
 
Generally, you can cancel your AAA car insurance policy at any time without paying a cancellation penalty. However, if your policy is through a nonaffiliated company, check with your insurance company about its cancellation policies. To cancel, contact your local auto club.
 
You can get an AAA car insurance quote online, even if you aren’t yet an AAA auto club member. To get a quote, you’ll be asked for the following information about your car and yourself:
 
AAA will use this information to give you a preliminary quote, which you can customize to meet your needs.
 
While AAA offers a wide range of discounts and coverage options, its full product offerings aren’t available everywhere, and its services and customer support can vary by location. Before applying for a car insurance policy and paying for an AAA membership, it’s wise to shop around and compare other insurance options.
 If you live in an area with a strong AAA auto club, AAA car insurance can be an excellent option. Depending on your location, you can qualify for auto insurance with optional coverages and a wide range of discounts that offset the cost of an AAA membership. You can also bundle your policy with homeowners or condo insurance for further savings and even take advantage of gap coverage to protect your new vehicle. 
Investopedia is dedicated to furnishing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of car insurance providers. We reviewed each insurance provider’s coverage options, available discounts, customer services, and satisfaction ratings to ensure that our content helps users make the right insurance decision for their needs.
 Insurance Information Institute. "What Determines the Price of an Auto Insurance Policy?" Accessed Sept. 2, 2020. J.D. Power. "Auto Insurance Claims Satisfaction Reaches Record High as Carriers Refine Time-Consuming Processes, J.D. Power Finds." Sept. 2, 2020. AM Best. "Automobile Club." Accessed Sept. 2, 2020.