
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
AARP is a nonprofit organization that offers auto insurance coverage to its members through the Hartford, leveraging more than 200 years of experience and knowledge from one of the insurance industry’s leaders. The Hartford offers a wide range of insurance options so that AARP members can take advantage of multiple policy discounts and simplify their insurance coverage.
 24/7 car insurance claims hotline 12-month auto insurance rate protection Exclusive discounts and benefits for AARP members Insurance provided by a third party Must be 50 or older Must be an AARP member In response to the coronavirus, a 15% discount has been automatically applied to up to three months of auto policies. Initially, the discount was applied to two months of policies for all customers with an active policy as of April 1, 2020. An additional 15% discount was applied to another month’s worth of premiums for all customers with an active policy as of June 1, 2020. 
AARP’s auto insurance includes the following coverage options:
 
Liability coverage includes:
 
Medical coverage includes:
 
These protect you if you’re in an accident with someone who is at fault and they either do not have insurance or their insurance does not cover all of the damages. Uninsured motorist coverage also protects you in case of a hit-and-run accident.
 
AARP auto insurance also offers a number of additional coverages for your policy.
 
When requesting a quote, AARP requires applicants to select “male” or “female.” Its underwriting process has not been updated to include those who identify as nonbinary, genderqueer, agender, or bi-gender.
 
There are a number of discounts available that you may be eligible for to lower your AARP auto insurance premiums.
 
Auto insurance from AARP is available in all 50 states and Washington, D.C. Insurance coverage requirements and options vary by state.
 
Customer service is available over the phone, online, or through the Hartford’s mobile app. Live phone agents are on call Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. ET and Saturday from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET. The call center is closed on Sundays.
 
Customers can easily manage their policy, make premium payments, and access policy documents on the Hartford website. Additionally, you can change vehicles and drivers, check on claims, and opt in for paperless documents.
 
Policyholders have access to many of the same functions on the app that are available online. Plus, you have additional features, including:
 
It is important to work with an insurance company that has a strong financial backing. AM Best, a credit rating agency focused on the insurance industry, gave the Hartford an A+ (Superior) Financial Strength rating.﻿﻿ These ratings measure an insurer’s stability and ability to meet its contractual obligations. An insurance company with a high rating can be relied upon to pay claims submitted by policyholders.
 
In J.D. Power’s 2020 Insurance Shopping Study, the Hartford ranks highest among midsize auto insurers in providing a satisfying purchase experience.﻿﻿
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has a database of all complaints received about insurance companies. The NAIC publishes companies’ complaint ratios, meaning the number of complaints a company received the previous year relative to its market share. Scores of 1.0 are considered average. Anything above 1.0 means the company received more complaints than average, while scores below 1.0 mean the reverse.
 
For 2019 the Hartford had a score of 0.71, meaning that it had received fewer complaints than other companies of its size. This score is lower than its scores in 2018 (1.02) and 2017 (1.03), indicating that the Hartford is receiving fewer complaints than in years past.﻿﻿
 
AARP auto insurance is provided by the Hartford, which offers a number of other types of insurance policies to the general public, including:
 
If you need to file a claim with AARP auto insurance, you can call customer service 24 hours a day at 800-243-5860 or submit your claim online.﻿﻿ To report your claim, you’ll need the following information:
 
After you’ve filed your claim, the AARP car insurance adjuster will go over everything with you. They will explain what is covered and if you will need to pay anything before your coverage kicks in. The adjuster will also let you know if they need any additional information, such as statements, photos, or a police report.
 
Next, you’ll get a repair estimate from a damage expert. Usually they will need just a few photos to assess the damage to your vehicle. The adjuster will let you know if they need anything else.
 
The adjuster will review the estimate and pay approved claims within 48 hours. They will also help you order a rental vehicle if one is needed.
 
Policyholders can cancel their AARP auto insurance policy at any time without paying a cancellation fee. To do so, follow these steps:
 
You can get a quote for AARP auto insurance online or by calling 888-546-9099. Online is a popular option because you can get a quote in as little as eight minutes without speaking to a salesperson. To receive your personalized quote, be prepared to provide the following information about yourself and your vehicle:
 
You will also be asked if you have taken a defensive driving course in the past three years and if you are interested in the TrueLane Discount app.
 
AARP will use this information to present options based on the amount and types of coverages you select. You can customize these options, amounts, and deductibles to create a quote that meets your needs. AARP auto insurance will review your driving record to finalize your quote.
 
AARP auto insurance offers exclusive benefits and discounts to its members. However, if you are not a member or are younger than 50 years old, you are not eligible for coverage. Before obtaining coverage with AARP car insurance, it makes sense to compare quotes from competing insurance carriers to ensure that you are getting the best deal.
 AARP car insurance is a good option for AARP members who are at least 50 years old. Insurance is provided by the Hartford, which has more than $20 billion in annual revenues and in excess of 200 years of experience. Quotes are available online or over the phone. Insurance premiums are locked in for 12 months at a time, and customers have numerous coverage and discount options. The Hartford offers many different types of insurance, including homeowners, renter’s, and umbrella policies, so customers can handle all of their property insurance needs with one company. 
Investopedia is dedicated to furnishing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of car insurance providers. We reviewed each insurance provider's coverage options, available discounts, customer services, and satisfaction ratings to ensure that our content helps users make the right insurance decision for their needs.
 Insurance Information Institute. "What Determines the Price of an Auto Insurance Policy?" Accessed Sept. 9, 2020. Google.com. "TrueLane from The Hartford." Accessed Sept. 9, 2020.