
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The ABOC Platinum Rewards Mastercard offers a lot of value through its rewards program and an introductory 0% APR, and there’s no annual fee to boot. But redemption options are somewhat limited if you want to maximize the value of your points.
 Earn a $150 statement credit after you spend $1,200 on purchases within the first 90 days from account opening. The ABOC Platinum Rewards Mastercard is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Strong rewards on rotating categories Subpar redemption value Few benefits 
The ABOC Platinum Rewards Mastercard is for people willing to keep track of rotating spending categories in order to maximize their credit card rewards. Without activation every quarter of the category or categories eligible for 5% cash back rewards, the card earns a meager 1% in cash back. 
 
This card could also appeal to those who want to take advantage of the 0% APR provision for purchases for the first year of card membership that can used for making larger purchases and paying off the outstanding balances without the burden of interest payments.
 
The card offers a $150 statement credit after you spend $1,200 in the first 90 days. While the bonus represents a strong 12.5% return on your spending, some other cards require you to spend just $500 for the same incentive.
 
The card offers 5 points per dollar on up to $1,500 spent each quarter in rotating categories. For 2020, those categories include:
 
You’ll earn 1 point per dollar on all other purchases you make with the card.
 
The card offers a handful of redemption options, but the value you get from your points can vary based on how you use them. According to online reports, here’s what to expect:
 
It’s pretty typical with most rewards programs to get less than 1 cent per point on merchandise. But with statement credits (and other forms of cash back), gift cards and travel, it’s standard to get at least 1 cent per point with most major rewards programs. Keep that in mind as you determine how much value you can get with the card.
 
For example, if you’re in it for the 5X rewards rate and prefer cash back, your effective rewards rate is just 3.75% with statement credits. In comparison, the Chase Freedom and Discover it offer a true 5% rewards rate, up to $1,500 in spending, on rotating bonus categories.
 
The card’s bonus rewards rate is among the best in the business, so make sure you know what the current and upcoming bonus categories are so you can plan spending accordingly. Just be careful of spending money on something you don’t need for the sake of bonus rewards—the value you get back pales in comparison to the cost of the unnecessary purchase.
 
Also, plan to hold onto your points for travel redemptions only. That way, you’re not leaving money on the table with less valuable redemption options. 
 
And again, it’s best to avoid the card’s base rewards rate of just 1 point per dollar.
 
Amalgamated Bank of Chicago (ABOC) wasn’t included in the 2019 J.D. Power Credit Card Satisfaction Study, but the bank has an A+ rating with the Better Business Bureau. 
 
According to one of the bank’s representatives, its customer service team is available Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Central time, but you can reach someone outside of those hours if you’ve lost your credit card. With most national card issuers, 24/7 customer service is standard.
 
Also, unlike many major card issuers, ABOC doesn’t offer free access to your FICO or VantageScore credit cards.
 
The ABOC Platinum Rewards Mastercard doesn’t offer any security features beyond the industry standard fraud protection.
 
For the most part, the card’s fees are in line with credit card industry standards. One exception is that it doesn’t charge a foreign transaction fee. Some similar cards that offer rotating bonus categories or an introductory 0% APR promotion on purchases charge 3% on each purchase made abroad.
 
The ABOC Platinum Rewards Mastercard has a lot of promise with its 5X bonus categories, but the card’s subpar redemption value with statement credits and gift cards should give you pause—especially considering you can expect this card’s maximum redemption value as a minimum with many other rewards credit cards. 
