
Form 1095-A: Health Insurance Marketplace Statement is a form that is sent to Americans who obtain health insurance coverage through a Health Insurance Marketplace carrier.﻿﻿
 
The form does not have to be returned to the government but serves as a record of the individual's coverage. It includes information such as the effective date of the coverage, the premium amounts paid monthly, and any advance payments of the premium tax credit or subsidy.﻿﻿
 
The form was created with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), familiarly known as Obamacare. People who receive coverage from the Marketplace created by that law may be eligible for subsidized coverage or for a tax credit.﻿﻿ A penalty for taxpayers who are not covered by health insurance was abolished at the start of 2019.﻿﻿
 
You will receive Form 1095-A if you enrolled in a qualified health plan via the federal Health Insurance Marketplace or a state's exchange. The exchanges use the form to provide participants in different markets with information on their coverage.﻿﻿
 
You do not have to submit Form 1095-A itself. You have to provide information from the form or acknowledge that you have received one on the federal tax return.﻿﻿
 
If you are eligible for a premium tax credit, you may have to attach a related form, Form 8962: Premium Tax Credit.﻿﻿
 
You should keep Form 1095-A for your records. The form is issued, as suggested by its title, by the Health Insurance Marketplace.﻿﻿
 
When preparing your tax return, you or your tax preparer will use 1095-A to fill out Form 8962: Premium Tax Credit if you are eligible to receive the credit.﻿﻿
 
According to the IRS, if you are expecting to receive a Form 1095-A, you should wait to file your income tax return until you receive it. Because it deals with claiming or reporting of tax credits, which in turn affects the amount of income tax you owe or any refunds you are due, 1095-A is crucial in the filing process.﻿﻿
 
Taxpayers should receive a Form 1095-A by mid-January of the year following the coverage year, either by mail or in their HealthCare.gov accounts. Individuals who don't receive their forms or see inaccuracies in them can contact HealthCare.gov directly.﻿﻿
 
The form lists each month for which you received coverage and the amount you paid in premiums. It also contains personal information including your name, address, and Social Security number. Your policy number and insurance company name also appear on the form.﻿﻿
 The penalty for having no health coverage has been abolished; however, some buyers are still eligible for tax credits for buying it.﻿﻿﻿﻿ 
All versions of Form 1095-A are available on the IRS website.﻿﻿ Form 8962, used to claim or report tax credits, also is available.﻿﻿
 HealthCare.gov. "How to use Form 1095-A." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Health Insurance Marketplace Statements." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. HealthCare.gov. ”No health insurance? See if you'll owe a fee.” Accessed Sept. 14, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Form 1095-A," Page 2. Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Prior Year Products." Accessed Feb. 13, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. ”About Form 8962, Premium Tax Credit.” Accessed Sept. 14, 2020.