
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Affirm 
Affirm offers instant financing for retail purchases.﻿﻿ The company has thousands of partners, both in-person and online, that allow you to buy now and pay later. You may apply at the point of sale with only a soft credit inquiry, but your annual percentage rate (APR) could be higher than you expect. Our review covers everything you need to know about Affirm and how to decide if it’s right for you.
 
Affirm offers APRs between 0% to 30% depending on your credit history.﻿﻿ You may borrow anywhere from $0 to $17,500, but the amount may vary by store. Affirm offers personal loan terms for three, six, or twelve months, but depending on the retailer and the size of the purchase, terms could be as short as 1 to 3 months, or as long as 36 months.﻿﻿ There is no minimum credit score to qualify for an Affirm personal loan, but the company considers the current economic conditions, your credit score, and your past history with Affirm.
 Prequalify with soft credit inquiry Quick financing No fees May improve credit score Maximum APR of 30% Not available everywhere No refunds for interest paid on returns Possible down payment Affirm 
Affirm offers two personal loan options. You may use Affirm to borrow money for purchases through partner stores. If your purchase is less than $250, you may have access to AffirmGo, which offers three monthly payments with a 0% APR.
 
You may apply for a personal loan through Affirm partners and get instant approval. 
 
Before applying for an Affirm personal loan, you may prequalify through a retail partner or through Affirm’s mobile app. You can complete either option with a soft credit inquiry, which won’t hurt your credit score. Prequalification doesn’t guarantee approval, but you can see how much you may be able to borrow.
 
There are three ways to apply for an Affirm personal loan: through a partner store, via Affirm’s mobile app, or online at Affirm.com. All three options offer a fast application process, instant approval, and funding.  
