
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Allstate works to live up to its promise that you will be in good hands, providing car insurance customers with personal service via its network of agents, as well as easy-to-use online and mobile tools. Allstate also offers a number of perks and discounts, although the policies may be more expensive than similar policies from other insurers.
 Large network of agents Many discounts and perks Easy-to-file claims High rate compared with other insurers Insurance only sold in six-month terms In April, May, and June 2020, Allstate automatically offered a COVID-19 assistance program, Shelter-in-Place Payback﻿, which provided a 15% payback to personal auto insurance customers. In addition, any customers experiencing financial hardship can ask for a special payment plan that delays payments without penalty. 
Allstate’s personal auto insurance includes the following types of coverage:
 
The Allstate liability coverages are:
 
Liability coverage is required by law in every state except New Hampshire.﻿﻿
 
This type of coverage will pay for damages to your car as a result of an accident, regardless of who is at fault. Once you have met your deductible, your collision coverage can help pay to repair or replace your car if you hit another car or stationary object, or if your car is damaged in a parking lot.
 
Comprehensive coverage will pay for damage to your car from causes other than accidents. The coverage may pay for repair or replacement if your car is damaged for reasons such as:
 
This pays for the medical expenses of an insured driver and their passengers if any are injured because of an accident, no matter who is at fault in the accident. This kind of coverage can also potentially pay for medical expenses of the insured or their family members if they are injured as a pedestrian or as a passenger in someone else’s car.
 
Allstate’s uninsured motorist coverage and underinsured motorist coverage can help you pay for property damage or medical expenses that are a result of an accident where an uninsured or underinsured motorist is at fault. Nineteen states and the District of Columbia require coverage for uninsured motorists, but only a handful require underinsured coverage.﻿﻿
 
PIP can help you pay for medical bills, hospital bills, and costs not covered by your health insurance if you are in an accident, including:
 
PIP is a legal requirement in 17 states.﻿﻿
 
Umbrella coverage can protect you if you are facing a liability claim that is higher than your liability coverage limits. A personal umbrella policy is an optional addition to your other coverage.
 
This optional policy addition can help cover the costs of roadside assistance. Allstate roadside coverage pays for the following:
 
If your car is damaged in an accident or needs to go to the shop for repairs, this can help you pay for your rental car while you’re waiting for your repairs to be completed. It is entirely optional.
 
This coverage, which is not commonly found with all auto insurers, offers funds to replace stolen or damaged equipment, speakers, and speaker components in your car.
 
Allstate offers customers a number of different discounts to help you lower your premiums and deductibles.
 
Allstate offers car insurance in every state in the nation, as well as the District of Columbia. In addition, Allstate has insurance agents available in every state, so you should be able to find a local agent who can serve your needs.
 
Allstate’s advertising emphasizes its purportedly excellent customer service and generally seems to deliver a number of methods for customers to get the care they need.
 
The insurer offers customers a mobile app that not only works as a digital insurance ID card and policy document repository; it also offers accessibility to on-demand roadside assistance, allows drivers to take smartphone photos to quick start a claim, lets you pay your bill, and gives instant access to an agent. The app is available on both iOS and Android, and has a 4.8 out of five star rating on iOS and a 4.1 out of five star rating on Android.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Allstate’s website also has robust tools to make it easy for users to handle all of their insurance paperwork, claims processes, bill paying, and other tasks. Finally, customers can call 800-255-7828 (800-ALLSTATE) to speak to a representative 24/7.
 
Though Allstate has worked to make it easy to purchase insurance and make a claim with them, customers are not entirely satisfied. According to the 2020 J.D. Power Insurance Shopping Study, Allstate scored 858 out of a 1,000 point scale in customer satisfaction for insurance shopping. This is two points below the industry average of 860.﻿﻿ Additionally, in the 2019 J.D. Power Auto Claims Satisfaction Study (which is the most current study available), Allstate scored only an 853 out of 1,000, well below the industry average of 868.﻿﻿
 
An additional customer service concern is the financial stability of an insurer, as customers want to feel confident that their insurance company will be solvent when they need to make a claim. AM Best rates insurers on financial strength, giving a Financial Strength Rating represented by a letter. Allstate enjoys an AM Best rating of A+ (Superior), which is only a single step down from Best’s highest rating of A++, as reported by Yahoo! Finance.
 
Finally, it’s also useful to have a sense of how many complaints are lodged against an insurer. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) compiles consumer complaints about insurers, and compares the information to the industry average. NAIC sets the industry average complaints at 1.0, meaning a company with a score of 2.0 has twice the number of complaints as the average. Allstate has an overall score of 2.01.﻿﻿
 
In addition to auto insurance, Allstate offers a long menu of other insurance products for its customers. These include:
 
Allstate customers have a number of options for filing claims. If you wish to reach out to your agent directly, you can call them, but note that your agent may only be available during normal business hours. If you would like to speak directly to a live representative, you can call 800-255-7828 (800-ALLSTATE ) to file and track claims over the phone. This 24/7 toll-free phone line is easy to remember and makes it simple to file a claim even if you do not have your agent’s contact information or access to the web or mobile app.
 
You may also file your claim using either the Allstate online portal or mobile app. The app includes the QuickFoto Claim feature, which allows you to snap pictures with your smartphone and upload them to the app to quickly get a claim started. Customers can file and track their claims from either the mobile app or their account with Allstate’s online portal.
 
In general, Allstate customers can expect their claims to follow these steps:
 
To cancel your Allstate policy, the insurer requires you to directly contact your agent, who may ask you to make a written request for cancellation.
 
Allstate makes it easy to get a quote via its online quote generator. This tool allows you to determine if you are eligible for Allstate auto insurance and get an idea of your costs in just a couple of minutes. If you’d prefer to work directly with an agent, you can also do a search on the website for an agent near you.
 
Whichever method you prefer, come prepared with the following information to get the most accurate quote:
 
Applying for insurance with a spouse or domestic partner who will also be on the insurance policy? Don’t forget to also provide their personal information and insurance history.
 
Insurance shopping is an important part of determining which insurer will be the right one for your needs. That’s because the underwriting process may be slightly different from one insurer to the next, meaning your premiums may vary from one insurer to the next. The best way to find the right auto insurance carrier for you is to generate multiple quotes and find the one that will give you the best value for your specific car insurance needs.
 Allstate is a giant in the auto insurance industry, and as such it is able to offer a number of easy-to-use tools as well as many different discounts. With a nationwide footprint and a network of 10,800 agents, Allstate is easily available to nearly every driver in the country. However, despite its ubiquity, Allstate does not necessarily offer the best prices compared with its competitors, and its customer service satisfaction ratings are below average. Allstate is a good option for a driver who would like mobile and digital tools and easy access to a large network of agents and reputable repair shops. It will not be as good a fit for a cost-conscious driver or one looking for the highest level of customer service available. 
Investopedia is dedicated to furnishing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of car insurance providers. We reviewed each insurance provider’s coverage options, available discounts, customer services, and satisfaction ratings to ensure that our content helps users make the right insurance decision for their needs.
 National Association of Insurance Commissioners. "Uninsured Motorists." Accessed Sept. 18, 2020. Insurance Information Institute. "Background on: Compulsory Auto/Uninsured Motorists: Other Solutions to the Uninsured Motorist Problem." Accessed Sept. 18, 2020. Insurance Information Institute. "Background on: Compulsory Auto/Uninsured Motorists: Automobile Financial Responsibility Limits By State (As of September 2020)." Accessed Sept. 18, 2020.