
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Ally Bank is a leader in online banking. With multiple deposit accounts available, along with attractive interest rates, Ally is one of the top choices in the field. Not only does it have personal banking solutions covered; it also offers a wide array of services, including auto loans, home loans, and investment options.
 No monthly fees on deposit accounts High rate on savings and CD accounts No balance requirements Large fee-free ATM network No physical locations No cash deposits Low rate on money market accounts 
Ally Bank should appeal to individuals looking for a full-service online bank. It’s an especially good fit for consumers who are looking to:
 
As a full-service online bank, Ally offers a variety of banking accounts and services.
 
Ally’s online savings account is a high-yield savings account that offers 0.60% APY regardless of your account balance. Having an online savings account is a great way to save money to reach financial goals. Other highlights of the savings account include:
 
Online savings accounts from Ally are subject to federal transaction limits. Select withdrawals and transfers are limited to a combined total of six per statement period. Ally Bank charges a $10 charge per transaction over the limit.﻿﻿
 
Ally offers a way to earn interest with its interest checking account. There are no minimum opening deposit or ongoing balance requirements, but rates are based on your account balance.
 
Ally’s online checking accounts come with a free debit card and checks, along with fee-free access to AllPoint ATMs across the U.S. Ally Bank also reimburses up to $10 per statement period for fees from other ATMs.
 
Interest checking accounts give Ally customers access to free online bill pay capabilities.﻿﻿
 
Ally’s money market account offers better rates than found at traditional banks, but they are lower than those from the top online banks. All balances currently earn a 0.50% APY.
 
Money market accounts have no minimum opening deposit and no monthly fees. Customers also have access to a debit card and the AllPoint ATM network for free. Ally even reimburses charges from out-of-network ATMs, up to $10 per statement cycle. There are no limits on ATM withdrawals, but there is a limit of six additional monthly transactions, with a $10 fee for each transaction over the limit. Check writing privileges also come with Ally money market accounts.﻿﻿
 
Ally Bank has three different CD offerings:﻿﻿
 
High-Yield CDs offer a range of terms, from three months to five years. Customers can earn up to 1.00% APY depending on chosen terms. There is no minimum deposit requirement, and there are no monthly fees. Early withdrawals are subject to penalties, up to 150 days of interest.﻿﻿
 
Raise Your Rate CDs give customers the ability to increase earning if Ally’s rates increase. You can raise your rate once for two-year CDs and twice with four-year CDs. Currently, rates for these CDs sit at 0.70% APY. There are no monthly maintenance fees charged, and there is no minimum opening deposit requirement. Raise Your Rate CDs are also subject to early withdrawal penalties, up to 120 days of interest.﻿﻿
 
No Penalty CDs, which earn up to 0.60% APY. Account holders are free to withdraw both interest and principal funds any time, starting six days after funding an account, with no penalties. All No Penalty CDs have 11-month terms, no minimum opening deposit requirement, and no monthly fees.﻿﻿
 
Ally Bank also offers a wide range of other products and services:
 
Ally Bank offers several ways to get support when needed. Phone support is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Customers can also log into their online account to send secure messages.
 
For immediate service, Ally also offers chat support through its website. You can also send general correspondence by mail to:
 
Ally Bank Customer CareP.O. Box 951Horsham, PA 19044﻿﻿
 
To open an account with Ally Bank, you can apply online at Ally.com. You’ll need to choose the account option you want, enter some personal information, and then choose your funding option. Ally will email you if and when your account is approved. Ally Bank also offers options to open an account over the phone 24/7 or by downloading an application form and mailing it in.﻿﻿
 Ally Bank offers full-service online banking for customers who want to earn a higher APY than found at a local bank. If in-person banking isn’t a requirement, choosing Ally gives you a chance to build up savings more quickly through mostly competitive rates. Although its money market and checking accounts don't offer spectacular rates, as a whole Ally Bank delivers. It offers enough options to meet the needs of most people looking for a top-notch online bank. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Ally.com. "Online Savings Account." Accessed May 4, 2020. Ally.com. "Compare CDs." Accessed May 4, 2020. Ally.com. "ATM & Cash Back Locator." Accessed May 4, 2020. Ally.com. "Help Center: Where can I find Ally Bank branch locations?" Accessed May 4, 2020. Ally.com. "Interest Checking Account: FAQs: How will I add money to my Interest Checking Account?" Accessed May 4, 2020. Ally.com. "Online Savings Account." Accessed May 4, 2020. Ally.com. "Interest Checking Account." Accessed May 4, 2020.