
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Amazon Rewards Visa Signature offers rewards on online purchases at the shopping site and at Whole Foods Market, which Amazon owns. There are also tiered bonus rewards at restaurants, gas stations, and drug stores. There’s no annual fee and you receive a $50 Amazon Gift Card upon approval.
 Get a $50 Amazon.com Gift Card instantly upon credit card approval. The Amazon Rewards Visa is not one of our top-rated cash back credit cards. You can review our list of the best cash back credit cards for what we think are better options. 3% rewards on Amazon and Whole Foods spending, 5% for Prime members Several strong benefits for a no-fee card Relatively low one-time offer The strongest rewards require a $119 Amazon Prime membership 
Naturally, the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature best suits regular customers of Amazon.com or Whole Foods Market who also have an Amazon Prime membership. The additional 2% you’ll earn as a Prime member probably won’t alone justify the $119 annual membership. But it’s a nice bonus to add to other Prime features, from free fast shipping to video streaming.
 
This card may also have appeal if no other card in your wallet offers 2% rewards on dining, gas, and purchases from drug stores. That’s quite likely the case, unless you own either premium credit cards for which you pay a fee or no-fee cards that are dedicated to those purchases.  
 
Also, assuming you lack a premium credit card—and specifically one focused on travel—the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature offers three key benefits that are relatively rare in a no-fee card. The card provides secondary insurance coverage on rental cars and free roadside assistance if you become stranded in your own vehicle. It also lacks foreign-transactions fees, which is a boon when traveling abroad. 
 
Upon being approved for the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature, you receive a $50 Amazon Gift Card. No purchase must be made or spending threshold reached.
 
The Amazon Rewards Visa Signature credit card offers tiered rewards:
 
Rewards are accumulated in points, at the multiplier rate for the purchase in question. Spending $1 at Amazon.com or Whole Foods, then, would earn three points, with an additional 2 points awarded to Prime members. You’d receive 2 points per dollar spent on gas, dining, or drug stores and a single point per dollar on all other purchases 
 
Rewards from the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature card are relatively easy to redeem. It’s possible to use the rewards to pay for purchases at Amazon.com. Every 100 points you accumulate in your account can be redeemed for $1 off the purchase price at checkout. You can choose to pay for all or part of a purchase at Amazon.com with points.
 
It’s also possible to redeem points for cash back as a statement credit or direct deposit into a bank account through Chase, with points. Additionally, it’s possible to redeem points for gift cards, and at the same rate. Redemptions start at 2,500 points for a $25 gift card. 
 
Redeeming points for travel requires that you actually call the Chase Travel Center. Because the rewards earned from the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature aren’t connected to Chase Ultimate Rewards, you can’t use that portal to redeem rewards for travel and other items.
 
Points earned with the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature can’t be transferred to other programs. 
 
The best way to make the most of the Amazon Rewards Visa Signature is of course to use it for all purchases at Amazon.com and Whole Foods Market, which earn 3% in rewards for regular Amazon customers—a higher rate than for any other types of purchases. But it can also be used for other purchases, of course, including those on gas and food—both as groceries and as restaurant meals, both of which earn 2% in rewards.Here are several scenarios on what spending could earn in rewards with this card.
 
Amazon.com shoppers who do not have a Prime membership spend, on average, about $600 per year at the site, according to an analysis by Statista. At 3% back, that’s 1,800 points, which are worth $18 in rewards. Then consider a non-Prime member who also shops at Whole Foods for, say, half of their groceries. Since the average household spent $4,464 on food for home in 2018, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, that Whole Foods spending would total about $2,230 and earn $66 in rewards, given the same 3% rewards rate. Grand rewards total: about $85. 
 
And if the household also has an Amazon Prime membership? They would enjoy an additional 2% in rewards on all of the purchases above. That boost would add $12 in rewards for the Amazon spending and $44 in rewards for the Whole Foods spending. Add this extra $55 or so in Prime rewards to the $85 earned from basic rewards and the grand total for the year reaches about $140. 
