
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Amazon Home Warranty  
Amazon Home Warranty tailors plans so that you can get the coverage you want within your budget.
 May permit you to use your own service provider when authorized Limited roof leak repair is available as optional coverage Can choose to only cover major home systems, appliances, or both Not available in: California, Florida, Hawaii, Iowa, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, and Washington Cannot choose a higher trade service fee in exchange for a lower monthly cost Excluded versus included coverage sometimes seem to contradict each other 
Amazon Home Warranty, founded in 2009, is headquartered is located in Columbus, Ohio. The company works with more than 40,000 contractors to provide service to thousands of customers. It has been featured on news outlets such as Fox News, CNN, and USA Today.
 Amazon Home Warranty  
Amazon Home Warranty provides home warranty plans that you can tailor to your specific needs. The company offers a choice of three home warranties designed to cover the repair or replacement costs for major home systems, appliances, or both. It also offers the option to purchase add-on coverage for items such as well pumps, sprinkler systems, or even wine refrigerators.
 
In our review, we look at the company’s pricing structure and the amount of coverage they provide in order to help you have a better understanding of what you can get for your money. Read our full review to see whether Amazon Home Warranty has the right plan for you.  
 
Amazon Home Warranty offers its customers a choice of three plans: a home systems plan, an appliance plan, and a plan that combines both. The company charges a service call fee of $75 for each claim, payable when the technician arrives for your repair.
 
Price quotes were received from several different areas of the country, all of which were the same. Amazon Home Warranty provides coverage for much of the U.S. but does not cover California, Florida, Hawaii, Iowa, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, and Washington.
 
Amazon Home Warranty also allows you to add optional coverage for a monthly fee.
 
Amazon Home Warranty offers three plans providing coverage on major home systems, appliances, or both. Plans are available to real estate professionals, although you must create an account to get more information. While you can get a free quote online, you are required to provide the property information before you are allowed to see your quote. You will hear from a customer service representative shortly after you provide your information.
 
Unlike some companies, Amazon Home Warranty only provides one trade service call fee (TSF) choice of $75. This is about average when compared with the competition. The company has regular promotions, such as a free month when you sign up.
 
Amazon Home Warranty Average Monthly Cost:
 
Although Amazon Home Warranty provides coverage for appliances and major home systems, there are a lot of exclusions. This is normal with most warranty plans, but there are some specific exclusions that we found confusing. This could make you think that a repair is covered when it is not.
 
As an example, drain stoppages and clogs are a covered item, however, upon further reading, there is a long list of things that may actually cause the stoppages and clogs which are not covered. One being a root intrusion– a stoppage or clog resulting from this is likely a denied claim. Review a complete list of coverage and exclusions with an Amazon Home Warranty’s sample contract.
 Read through the plan exclusions carefully to fully understand what might not be covered in a claim. 
Payout caps vary depending on the system. As an example, there is a dollar cap amount of $2,500 per contract term for central air conditioning systems, but only $500 per contract term for electrical systems. The dollar cap for the central air is higher than average while the electrical system is about average. Since we could not find a payout cap for appliances, we recommend that you thoroughly read through your contract so that you understand your out-of-pocket costs.
 
Once you have made a service call request online, you can typically expect authorization for a major repair within 48 hours. The company uses a network of providers, though you may be able to request your own service provider to get authorization for the claim. Amazon Home Warranty does note that they will attempt to expedite repairs if there is an emergency, but the company also states that they will determine what constitutes an emergency, so this is at their discretion.
 
Amazon Home Warranty’s contract states that you must immediately contact them by phone when a problem occurs. They will contact a service provider within 48 hours of a claim being made who will then notify you to schedule an appointment. Appointments are made at a time that is mutually convenient for you and the service provider.
 
Amazon Home Warranty has a rating of B with the Better Business Bureau (BBB). While most recent reviews are four-star, older reviews show that most of the complaints the company has received have been issues with service contractors not fixing an issue or a delay in service. Since this is not the case with more recent reviews, it is possible that the company has taken the feedback to heart and has made changes to how these issues are handled.
 
There have also been complaints that customers thought the company was part of Amazon.com and purchased on name recognition alone, however, Amazon Home Warranty clearly posts on its website that there is no affiliation between the two companies.﻿﻿
 Don’t just shop price. Shop what you get for the price. Many find Amazon worth the few extra dollars per month. 
We chose Home Warranty of American (approximately $350 to $600) to compare to Amazon Home Warranty (approximately $349-$579 annually) because of its similarity in the price range and the fact that both have a $75 trade service call fee (although Home Warranty of America also offers a $100 trade service call fee, which reduces monthly costs).
 
Both companies offer similar coverage for their regular plans, with Home Warranty of America offering two plans that combine major home systems and appliances. Amazon Home Warranty, on the other hand, offers three plans, with one plan covering appliances, one plan covering major home systems, and a third that combines the two. There is very little difference in the covered items for Home Warranty of America’s Premier Plan Plus with a $75 service call fee for $53.46 versus Amazon Home Warranty’s Combo Plan for $52. Interestingly, both companies offer limited roof leak repair, which is uncommon in the industry.
