
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
American Express is well known for offering a range of personal and business credit cards. It also offers personal loans with competitive rates and few fees for existing credit cardholders, as well as online savings accounts and certificates of deposit (CDs).
 
To qualify for a personal loan, you must receive an offer from American Express and meet eligibility criteria. Our in-depth review covers what you need to know about American Express personal loans and how to decide if one is right for you. 
 Competitive rates Ability to pre-qualify with soft credit check Quick decision process Minimal fees Must be an existing cardholder No flexibility on payment due date Low maximum loan amount Late payment fee 
American Express offers one unsecured personal loan for existing credit cardholders.
 
After signing your personal loan agreement, it may take three-to-five business days to receive the funds. It may take longer if American Express needs to verify your bank account.﻿﻿
 
In addition to the features mentioned above, personal loans offered by American Express also have these characteristics:
 American Express personal loans have some restrictions. You can’t use the funds for post-secondary education, real estate, business, buying stocks, purchasing a vehicle, or paying off an American Express credit card. 
To apply for a personal loan, you must be an existing American Express credit cardholder in good standing. You also must receive a personal loan offer from American Express.
 
You can start the process by entering a loan amount and credit score on the lender's website. It will show your estimated monthly payment options—12, 24, or 36 months. You can check if you have an offer from American Express by clicking on the blue “check for offer” button. You will need to login to see the offer. ﻿﻿
 
If you have an offer, you may pre-qualify with a soft inquiry on your credit—which won’t impact your credit score. Before submitting a personal loan application, you can see your maximum loan amount, maximum APR, and repayment options. This isn’t a guarantee of approval. The personal loan application will ask for the following details:﻿﻿
 
Once you submit the application, American Express will conduct a hard inquiry on your credit. This will temporarily lower your credit score. Most applicants will receive an answer “within seconds,” according to American Express. But it may take longer if the company needs additional information.﻿﻿
 
You must have a valid checking account to receive the funds via direct deposit. The process may be faster if American Express already has your banking details on file. After signing the personal loan agreement, American Express will transfer the money within three-to-five business days.﻿﻿
 There is a brief timeline—only three days—to sign the personal loan agreement after approval. If you miss this deadline, American Express will withdraw your application and you can’t re-apply for 60 days.    