
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
American Express has been around since 1850 and is a household name in the credit card industry for its popular rewards credit cards. Besides credit cards, though, the online-only American Express Bank offers a couple of personal banking options, including a high-yield savings account and certificates of deposit (CDs). This in-depth review will help you decide if American Express Bank is right for you.
 Competitive rate on savings account No minimum deposit requirements No monthly fees No checking account Average CD rates No mobile banking app 
American Express Bank should appeal to individuals looking for a simple high-yield savings account. It’s an especially good fit for consumers who are looking to:
 
Personal Savings is a high-yield savings account that’s also the only savings account offered by American Express Bank. Customers currently earn a 0.60% APY, which is not bad but also not as good as rates offered by other online banks.
 
A plus for Personal Savings accounts is the lack of minimum opening and ongoing balance requirements. There is also no monthly maintenance fee.
 
Funds in an American Express Personal Savings account are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) up to $250,000 per depositor. You can also link up to three external bank accounts, allowing you to transfer money in and out of the account as needed. You can set up recurring transfers into your Personal Savings account to build toward savings goals, such as an emergency fund or a vacation fund.
 
American Express Bank also offers CDs with terms ranging from six months to five years. Longer CD terms earn a decent APY, with five-year CDs currently at 0.85%. Shorter CDs earn much less, although still better than what you would find at a traditional brick-and-mortar bank.
 
Interest earned on CDs through American Express Bank is credited on a monthly basis. Customers have options on what happens to that interest:
 
CDs automatically renew at the maturity date if you don't do anything. Customers should receive correspondence from American Express Bank at least 10 days before the maturity date, so they can decide.
 
American Express Bank CDs are subject to an early withdrawal penalty if you take out funds, other than interest before the account reaches maturity. The early withdrawal penalties are as follows:
 
American Express offers a wide range of credit cards, although they aren’t directly tied to its banking operations. Credit cards include a variety of travel credit cards, cash-back cards, a balance transfer card, and a host of business credit cards. Here are some of the cards it offers.
 
American Express’ website features a thorough FAQ section, but if you need more personal service, there are two options. Customers can receive support through its customer service phone line (1-800-528-4800), which is available 24/7, or you can write to:
 
American Express National Bank
 
P.O. Box 30384
 
Salt Lake City, Utah 84130
 
As it’s an online bank, there is no in-person support available. American Express Bank doesn’t currently offer any chat support either.
 
To open an account with American Express Bank, you can apply online at AmericanExpress.com. You must be at least 18 years old and a U.S. citizen or resident alien to be eligible for an account.
