
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Not only is Amica the oldest auto insurance company in America; it’s also one of the highest-rated insurers. The company is known for its wide array of car insurance coverage options and superb customer service. Amica provides customizable coverage, with a variety of options, discounts, and extra perks not offered by many other insurers.
 Highly rated Multiple discounts available Extra perks and services Discounts not available in all states Few local offices No rideshare coverage For COVID-19 assistance, Amica is offering all of its customers that have auto, motorcycle, RV, and trailer policies four months of refunds in 2020. You must remain insured by Amica on the dates the refunds are issued. 
Amica’s auto insurance includes the following coverage:
 
Amica also offers a premium auto insurance option, bundling top-of-the-line coverage into one package. Services include identity fraud monitoring, accident forgiveness, and more.
 
Like most insurers, Amica requires you to select “male” or “female” when requesting an online quote for insurance. At this time its underwriting process is not updated to include transgender or nonbinary options.
 
Amica offers its customers a myriad of discounts to help lower car insurance bills, but they aren’t available in all states.
 
Amica car insurance is available in 49 states and the District of Columbia. It’s not currently available to residents of Hawaii. Coverage limits, discounts, and payment options can vary by state.
 
Amica sells directly to customers online, although it does have 44 regional offices across the U.S. that customers can visit for in-person help. Customer support is available 24/7 by phone. Other support options are available through its mobile app, online account access, mail, and a contact form on its website.
 
Customers have access to a host of features and services through Amica’s mobile app. Available on iOS and Android, customers can make and track claims, access policy information, pay bills, and more. A copy of your insurance card is also available within Amica’s mobile app.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Amica is highly regarded in the insurance industry. The company received an A+ (Superior) rating from AM Best, an insurance-based credit rating agency. Insurance companies with high ratings from AM Best are known for being reliable in times of need and meeting their contractual obligations.﻿﻿
 
As noted above, Amica also ranks number one in customer satisfaction with J.D. Power. The insurance company has earned 50 J.D. Power Customer Satisfaction Awards to date, the first insurance provider to reach this feat.
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) keeps a database of all insurance company complaints. Each insurance company receives a complaint ratio, which is the number of complaints received the previous year compared to its market share.
 
Scores of 1.0 are considered average. Companies with scores above 1.0 received more complaints than average, while companies with scores below 1.0 received fewer than average. Amica’s complaint ratio for 2019 was 1.41.﻿﻿
 
Amica is known for more than just auto insurance. It provides insurance coverage for other policies, including:
 
You can make a claim through Amica’s mobile app, through Amica’s online claim center, or by calling 800-242-6422. When doing so, you’ll be asked for detailed information including but not limited to:
 
After filing a claim, Amica will contact you with the next steps. If the damage is minor, it will ask you to get an appraisal and send it in for review. For more severe damage, Amica will assign an appraiser who will inspect the car and send a copy of the report to you and whatever repair shop you choose or from Amica’s repair network.
 
Once Amica has completed its review of the appraisal, the company will send you a check to cover the damages. Customers can also sign up for direct deposit to receive funds faster.
 
You can cancel your Amica insurance policy by calling 800-242-6422. The company charges a $25 cancellation fee.
 
You can get an auto insurance quote online through Amica’s website or by calling 800-242-6422. For an accurate quote, you’ll need to provide personal information, including your:
 
After receiving your quote, you can decide to get coverage or not. If you want to move forward with Amica, make sure to only choose the coverage you want. Amica will review your driving record and credit report to finalize your premiums and other costs.
 
It’s important to research several insurance companies so you can find the one that best fits your needs. Although Amica makes Investopedia’s list of the best insurance companies of 2020, it may not be right for you. Its services are mostly online, so if you’re looking for a more personal insurance experience, seek out local options.
 Amica provides a top-notch insurance experience with highly rated customer support. You have access to your policies and claims through multiple channels, including online access and the mobile app. The company offers customizable auto insurance coverage along with an array of discounts that rival any insurance company. Having a poor driving record may limit eligibility or lead to higher premiums than you might like. Amica is the oldest auto insurer in the U.S., with coverage to meet most customer needs. 
Investopedia is dedicated to furnishing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of car insurance providers. We reviewed each insurance provider’s coverage options, available discounts, customer services, and satisfaction ratings to ensure that our content helps users make the right insurance decision for their needs.
