
Annuities are one way to generate a lifetime income, save for retirement without the worry of market risk, and leave something to your family or favorite charity after you die. However, as with many financial products, what was once a simple idea has become complicated.
 
There are three main types of annuities—fixed, variable, and indexed. This article will focus on what to look for in each type of annuity, as well as what questions to ask before you invest.
 
An annuity is an investment product sold by insurance companies or other financial institutions to hold and grow funds. The annuity is essentially a written contract between you and the firm. When you annuitize, you invest a certain amount with the company and then accept a payout stream that can begin immediately or in the future. The payouts can be for life or a certain number of years. Annuities are mainly used to provide steady income during retirement.
 
A fixed annuity promises that you’ll earn a stated interest rate on your money, resulting in the same payout year after year. This type of investment is risk-free. The insurance company assumes all the risk and guarantees that you’ll make the stated interest rate. Fixed annuities are not tied to the stock market in any way. There are two subcategories of fixed annuities:
 
An immediate annuity, also called a single premium annuity, is when you make a lump-sum, one-time payment, and then a short time later you start receiving monthly, quarterly, or yearly annuity payments. These payments can be for life or for a specified number of years. Generally, you buy this type of annuity when you are about to retire or are already retired and want to generate a safe, consistent income no matter what.
 
You purchase a deferred annuity when you want to save money on a tax-deferred basis and, at some point in the future, use the money that is invested for your ultimate goals. Some people use deferred annuities as a way to build for retirement, knowing that they will be receiving a guaranteed return no matter what. When you start receiving payouts, you’ll owe taxes on the earnings that you made in the annuity.
 
Generally, you can withdraw up to 10% a year from a fixed annuity without having to pay an early withdrawal penalty.﻿﻿ You can easily convert money from a deferred annuity to an immediate annuity.﻿﻿ You also can leave the money to a loved one or favorite charity free of estate taxes.
 
Also, annuities have a 30-day free-look period. If you don’t like what the annuity contract says or simply change your mind, you can return the annuity to the insurance company and receive a full refund.﻿﻿
 
With a variable annuity, you can make either a lump-sum payment or a series of payments. The company agrees to make consistent payments to you immediately or at some date in the future. Variable annuities combine the elements of mutual funds, life insurance, and tax-deferred retirement savings plans. When you invest in a variable annuity, you can select a variety of mutual funds in which to invest. A variable annuity has two phases:
 
During the accumulation phase, you are paying money into the annuity and have a variety of investment options, ranging from a balanced fund (a type of mutual fund that holds preferred stocks, bonds, and common stock to obtain income and growth) to money market funds and international funds. The money that you put in the investment options will increase or decrease depending on the funds’ performances.
 
The best information you can get about the variable annuity’s investment options is in the prospectus. This will describe the risks, volatility, and whether the fund contributes to the diversification of the investments in the annuity.
 
During the payout phase, you start to receive payments. These payments can be one lump sum, or you can have them sent out to you on a regular basis (monthly, quarterly, or annually) for a certain number of years or a lifetime. These payments are guaranteed by the insurance company.
 
As the name implies, with a variable annuity the interest rate on your money is going to vary, depending on the performance of the funds in which you invest. You can benefit from bull markets but also suffer from downturns when the bears start roaring.
 
Even so, variable annuities generally provide guarantees that you can’t get with other investments. For a fee you can add a death benefit feature, for example. Let’s say that you invest $125,000 into a variable annuity. A while later the value of the mutual funds held in the annuity declines to $95,000. If you had put this money into an ordinary mutual fund, you would be down $30,000. But with a variable annuity, your beneficiaries will still get $125,000 if you die.
 
In some products, if the market value rises to $150,000, your beneficiaries could get a “stepped-up” death benefit of $150,000.
 
With an indexed annuity, you can make a one-time payment or a series of payments. The company will credit you the return that is calculated by the changes on a certain index, such as the S&P 500. It will also guarantee you a minimum return, though these minimums can vary from one company to the next. Some of the benefits of an indexed annuity include:
 Annuities can come with high fees, so make sure you know the cumulative cost before deciding whether to buy one or not. 
There are several questions that you should ask yourself and an insurance agent to gain a greater understanding of any annuity you are considering.
 
Ask yourself:
 
Ask your insurance agent or financial advisor:
 
Each type of annuity has its own advantages and disadvantages. One of the major benefits of an annuity is that it allows you to build up money for retirement, so that when you do close that office door, you can take a lump-sum payment or create a consistent income that can last for either a certain number of years or life.
 
You are also able to build up money on a tax-deferred basis. Some of the drawbacks of investing in annuities include high fees, such as surrender fees if you need the money early and up-front and annual fees that may apply. It pays to take your time examining the different types of annuities in order to determine which will work for your situation.
 Annuity. "Withdrawing Money from an Annuity." Accessed July 7, 2020. CNN Money. "Ultimate guide to retirement." Accessed July 7, 2020. Annuity. "Free Look Period." Accessed July 7, 2020.