
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Aspiration was founded in 2015 as an online-only financial firm (not a bank) that focuses on helping customers make ethical choices with their money. Aspiration does not offer traditional checking or savings accounts, but customers can use its Spend & Save cash management account (CMA) for their day-to-day financial needs and transactions.
 “Pay What Is Fair” policy regarding fee structure Impressive APY on savings Earn cash back on purchases with ethical retailers Deposits do not fund fossil fuel exploration or production Highest APY only available with a higher fee account with several eligibility requirements No way to deposit cash Highest cash back only available with a higher fee account Out-of-network ATM fees are unclear 
Aspiration will appeal to socially and environmentally conscious customers who are comfortable with a nontraditional financial institution. Aspiration will be a good fit if you:
 
Aspiration does not offer traditional checking or savings accounts. Instead, Aspiration customers have a CMA, which is a brokerage account that allows you to manage cash, make payments, and earn interest. The Aspiration CMA offerings allow customers to use a single account for their checking account and savings account needs.
 Though Aspiration is not a bank, and CMAs are not the same as traditional bank accounts, customer deposits are still insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) up to $250,000. That’s because the money you deposit to Aspiration is held at one of the institution’s partner banks, all of which offer FDIC insurance. 
Aspiration Spend & Save is the basic CMA for customers. This account allows customers to spend and save from the same place while still providing you with many of the benefits of a checking account. There are no minimum balance requirements, and you get to choose your monthly fee (which could be anywhere from $0 to $20 per month). The opening minimum is just $10.
 
Customers receive a debit card with this account, which earns cash back on purchases from a variety of retailers. You will also earn interest on money that is not spent, which means you can earn money with both the Spend & Save sides of the CMA.
 
To earn cash back customers can spend money with one of the 16 companies that are part of the Conscience Coalition. You will receive a different cash back percentage with a Conscience Coalition purchase, depending on which company you are purchasing from.
 
In addition to Conscience Coalition cash back, you can also earn cash back by spending money with companies that have high Aspiration Impact Measurement (AIM) scores. The AIM score rates companies based on their ethical treatment of people and the planet, and the companies with the highest scores earn Aspiration debit card purchasers 0.5% cash back. Companies with lower scores earn lower percentages of cash back.
 
Any money you do not spend is considered to be in the “Save” side of an Aspiration CMA. However, unlike a traditional savings account, you are not limited to six savings withdrawals per month. That said, you may only transfer money from your Aspiration CMA to an external linked account once per day.
 Unfortunately, if you only have the basic Aspiration Spend & Save Account, you do not qualify for interest on your savings balance. To take advantage of the high-yield savings aspect of the Aspiration CMA, you will need to enroll in the Aspiration Plus Account. 
The biggest benefits of Aspiration’s CMAs are exclusively for Aspiration Plus customers. Unlike the basic Spend & Save account, Aspiration Plus has a set monthly fee of $3.99, although you can save a little money if you opt to pay a single annual fee of $44.99.
 
With Aspiration Plus, your cash back rewards for spending with Conscience Coalition members is raised to 10% across the board, although the amounts you earn by shopping with companies with high AIM scores remain the same. Aspiration Plus account holders also receive one out-of-network ATM fee reimbursement per month.
 An interesting perk of Aspiration Plus is the Planet Protection benefit, which automatically buys carbon offsets based on the number of gasoline purchases an account holder makes with the debit card. This allows Aspiration Plus customers to offset their fossil fuel usage automatically. Planet Protection is free for Aspiration Plus customers, but those who have the basic Aspiration account can also sign up for the service for $5.99 per month or $59 per year. 
The savings portion of your Aspiration Plus account also has added benefits. To start, even if you do nothing else, you will earn a 0.25% APY on your savings balance up to $10,000, and 0.10% thereafter. If you also spend at least $1,000 per month on your Aspiration debit card, you will receive a 1.0% APY on savings up to $10,000 and 0.10% thereafter.
 
In addition to its two CMAs, Aspiration also has the following products and services:
 
Aspiration offers both current and potential customers a thorough FAQ section on its website that can help you find the answers to nearly any question about its offerings. The institution’s mobile app is well rated on both Google Play and iTunes, with 4.5 stars and 4.8 stars, respectively.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
