
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Note: Avianca Airlines filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in New York in May. While the Avianca Vuela Visa card is still available, you may wish to consider other, more flexible travel card options such as the Citi Premier or Citi Prestige card that earn ThankYou Points that can be redeemed for travel on multiple Star Alliance airlines, including Avianca.
 
The Avianca Vuela Visa card’s solid intro offer and rewards rates are backed by an incredibly valuable rewards program, making it worth considering, especially if you travel regularly to Central America. The card’s annual fee is a bit steeper than average for most airline credit cards, though.
 Earn 40,000 LifeMiles after first purchase. The Avianca Vuela Visa Card is not one of our top-rated airline credit cards. You can review our list of the best airline credit cards for what we think are better options. Solid rewards on spending with Avianca and on gas and groceries Big spenders can half the miles required for an annual award flight Miles can be redeemed with many other airlines $149 annual fee Only a single Avianca benefit 
The Avianca Vuela Visa card is primarily designed for international travelers who frequently fly between the U.S. and Central America or Colombia. With these routes, you’ll be able to take advantage not only of the airline’s solid rewards value but also other card benefits, including an extra complimentary checked bag and award flight discounts. 
 
That said, Avianca flies to 75 destinations in total, including countries in Europe, North America and the Caribbean, so you’re not just restricted to a certain region. Also, you can use your LifeMiles to book flights on 25 other airlines through the Star Alliance program, making your options virtually endless.
 
The card offers 40,000 bonus miles after you make your first purchase. While that’s not the biggest airline bonus you can get in terms of miles, it’s worth $876, based on an average value of 2.19 cents per mile. That’s more than five times the card’s annual fee.
 
What’s more, you’ll get the bonus after making only a single purchase. In contrast, most airline credit cards require you to meet a minimum spending requirement in the first few months with the card. The only other major airline card that provides a sizable one-time offer after just one purchase is the AAdvantage Aviator Red World Elite Mastercard.
 
You’ll earn 3 miles per dollar on Avianca purchases, 2 miles per dollar at gas stations and grocery stores and 1 mile per dollar on all other purchases. Since some other airline credit cards only offer bonus miles on purchases made with the carrier, these rates represent decent rewards. 
 
Avianca offers a handful of options for miles redemption. The most promising in terms of value is booking award flights with the airline, which will give you 2.19 cents per mile on average. However, you can also use your rewards to book award flights through Avianca’s website with one of the airline’s Star Alliance partners, where mile values can vary depending on the partner and the itinerary.
 
You’ll also have the choice to use miles to pay for baggage fees, upgrades, lounge access and more.
 
In addition, you can redeem your miles with more than 200 business partners, including retailers, hotel chains, rental-car agencies, and more. Simply inform the merchant that you’d like to use miles to cover the purchase and provide your LifeMiles member number and four-digit PIN. 
 
Redemption values can vary with these options, though, and they may not provide as much value as award flights.
 
Avianca LifeMiles are worth 2.19 cents apiece on average when you use them for award flights with the airline. However, that’s just an average, and your actual results can be higher or lower, depending on the itinerary. 
 
Depending on the situation, you may also be able to get above-average value on flights you book with Avianca’s Star Alliance partners. 
 
To determine how much your miles are worth for a particular redemption, take the cash price of the ticket, subtract any taxes and fees associated with an award flight, then divide the result by the number of miles required to book the flight.
 
For example, let’s say you can book a flight from the U.S. to Colombia for $497 or 20,000 LifeMiles plus $40 in taxes and fees. Subtract $40 from $497 to get $457, then divide that by 20,000 miles to get 2.29 cents per mile. 
 
The average cardholder will easily earn the one-time offer, which can be enough for one or more roundtrip flights. 
 
As an example, we found a flight from New York City to Belize for $610.45 or 28,000 miles and $87.95 in taxes and fees. That amounts to a points value of 1.87 cents per mile. That’s less than the average value based on Investopedia data, but still a solid redemption value and one that doesn’t require a lot of research.
 
If you have the time and the desire to maximize your Avianca LifeMiles and manage to earn one or both of the card’s 50% award flight discounts, you may be able to earn far more than the program’s average value. 
 
For example, we found a flight from Los Angeles to Bogotá, Colombia, for $1,883.95 on Avianca Airlines. But if you were to use LifeMiles to book an itinerary with Copa Airlines and Avianca on the same dates, you’d only pay 70,000 miles plus $60.76 in taxes and fees.
 
Alone, that redemption gives you 2.6 cents per mile, which is above average but not by much. However, if you use one of your 50% discount certificates, you’ll only pay 17,500 miles on the return flight instead of 35,000. 
 
Reducing the total cost to 52,500 miles increases your redemption value to 3.47 cents per mile, which is impressive. And if you manage to find a flight fully operated by Avianca, you could increase that value even more.
