
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Axos Bank is one of the oldest online-only banks around. Formed in 2000, it continues to grow, offering full-service banking for individuals and businesses.﻿﻿ This in-depth review of one of the online banking industry leaders will give you insight into the accounts and services available through Axos Bank and whether it’s the right bank for you.
 Full-Service Banking ATM Fee Reimbursements Fewer Monthly Fees No Physical Branches Average CD Rates Lower Savings Rates 
Axos Bank should appeal to consumers looking for a full-service online bank. It may be a good fit for customers who want to:
 
Despite being strictly an online bank, Axos Bank offers a host of bank account options and services. 
 
Learn more about each type of account Axos Bank offers below.
 
Axos Bank’s High-Yield Savings earns considerably more interest than you’ll find at your local bank, but it’s still not as much as some of the best high-yield savings accounts. It does require an initial minimum deposit of $250 to open an account, but after that there are no monthly minimum balance requirements.
 
Other features of Axos’ savings account include:
 
Axos Bank’s savings account allows six total transactions per monthly billing statement, excluding withdrawals and transfers made by mail or ATM. 
 
Essential Checking is Axos Bank’s standard checking account. It doesn’t earn interest or rewards. It does offer perks such as Direct Deposit Express, which allows you to get paid up to two days early. 
 
This checking account comes with unlimited domestic ATM fee reimbursements, and there are no monthly minimum balance requirements. With Axos Bank’s Essential Checking account, you will never pay: 
 
Axos Bank’s Rewards Checking is a tiered interest rate account that earns up to 1.25% APY. It has no fees or minimum balance requirements, and it’s easy to open, with only a $50 minimum deposit required. It has three requirements to get to the highest APY:
 
If you achieve all three, you'll get 1.25%.﻿﻿
 
Typically, cashback rewards are reserved for credit cards, but CashBack Checking from Axos Bank is the exception. Customers earn up to 1% cash back on all signature-based purchases. Other features of CashBack Checking accounts include: 
 
Do you want to teach your children responsible money management skills? You can do just that with a First Checking account from Axos Bank. It’s a joint bank account for children ages 13 to 17 that features: 
 
Golden Checking is designed with individuals 55 years old and older in mind. With only a $50 initial deposit required, this interest-bearing checking account has a lot to offer, including:
 
The High-Yield Money Market accounts from Axos Bank combine high-yield interest earning with the conveniences of a checking account. An account comes with check writing privileges and a debit card. It earns 0.60% APY regardless of the balance amount. 
 
There is a $1,000 minimum balance required to open a money market account, but there are no monthly balance requirements after that. It doesn’t have monthly maintenance fees either. High-yield money market accounts have access to mobile banking through the Axos mobile app, which includes mobile check deposits.﻿﻿ 
 
If you’re looking to boost savings, consider CDs from Axos Bank. CDs allow customers to earn predictable returns on their money over an extended time. Interest earned on Axos’ CDs is much less than what you’ll find with many other online banks. Opening an Axos CD account does require a $1,000 minimum deposit. CD terms range from three months to five years, depending on your needs. Axos Bank CDs come with: 
 
Note: Similar to most banks, Axos Bank charges early withdrawal penalties to customers who withdraw funds, other than earned interest, before CD maturity. Penalties are based on CD term lengths.﻿﻿ 
 
Here are Axos Bank’s CD terms and rates.
 
Beyond traditional personal banking solutions, Axos Bank has a wide range of other offerings:
 
Axos Bank takes customer service seriously, with access 24/7 for its customers. Personal banking support is available by:
 
For convenience, the Axos Bank mobile app comes with helpful features such as account access, fund transfers, online bill payment, and mobile check deposits. The mobile app is available on iOS and Android. Axos Bank’s website features customer support options including FAQs, calculators, helpful articles, and other tools. Axos Bank accounts are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) for up to $250,000 per person. 
 
You can open an Axos Bank account through its website. You’ll need the following personal information available when opening an account: 
 
Applicants must be a U.S citizen or resident alien who is at least 18 years of age. For First Checking accounts, children must have a parent or guardian who is at least 18 years old as a joint owner on the account. 
 Axos Bank provides a way to move most of your banking online. There’s a lot to like about this online bank, with options for checking, savings, CDs, investing, and more. Multiple checking account options give customers the flexibility to earn interest or cash back. Axos Bank’s Rewards Checking account doesn’t have the highest APY among online banks, but it’s enough to make opening an account worthwhile as part of an overall online banking plan, and there almost no fees charged. Having no physical locations may be a turnoff for some customers, and those looking for competitive CD rates should turn elsewhere. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 AxosBank.com. "History of Axos Bank." Accessed April 9, 2020. AxosBank.com. "High-Yield Savings." Accessed April 9, 2020. AxosBank.com. "Essential Checking." Accessed April 9, 2020.