
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Struggling with bad credit can be one of the most stressful experiences in the world. If a financial emergency strikes or you want to consolidate your debt, you might believe it's impossible to qualify for a personal loan without turning to predatory payday lenders. In most circumstances, that's not true.
 
Personal loan options can be more limited when your credit isn't in good shape, but that doesn’t mean you have no options. There are lenders who may be willing to offer you a personal loan even if you have a poor credit rating.
 
Avant offers the best overall personal loan to borrowers with credit challenges. If you qualify for funding, you could receive up to $35,000. Interest rates start as low as 9.95%. Although Avant charges an administrative fee, the maximum amount it charges (4.75%) is lower than what you may see from other comparable lenders.
 Lower starting interest rate among subprime lenders, but you might pay more if your credit score is on the low end of Avant’s approval range No prepayment penalty for paying off your loan early Soft credit inquiry performed when you check your loan options online Higher interest rates compared to the rate you might receive elsewhere with better credit Low maximum loan amount of $35,000—higher loan amounts available with other lenders An administrative fee up to 4.75% may be taken directly out of your initial loan amount 
Other important information:
 
Founded in 1952, First Tech Federal Credit Union is geared towards major technology-geared companies (though anyone can join the Financial Fitness Association for $8).
 
Interest rates start as low as 7.70% and they offer personal loans up to $50,000.
 Higher maximum loan amount compared with other lenders in this category Longer loan terms than other personal loan companies No prepayment penalties if you decide to pay off your loan early A co-borrower may be needed to qualify for a lower interest rate No soft credit inquiry to check your loan offer and estimated interest rate online Access for members only thought qualifying as a member can be done through the Financial Fitness Association 
Other important information:
 
This credit union offers some of the best rates for those with less than stellar credit and one of the only financial institutions that offers such a low loan amount — starting at $250. Terms start at 6 months and you can secure a co-signer to help you qualify for a better rate. 
 
To be eligible for membership, you need to have ties to the Department of Defense, the armed forces, or the National Guard. Otherwise, you’ll need to be a veteran or have an immediate family member who has a Navy Federal membership. 
 Joint applications available: members can apply with a co-borrower to secure a more competitive interest rate Low minimum loan amount: At $250, this amount is the lowest among the lenders on our list Short loan terms available: Repayment terms start at just 6 months  Credit union membership required No soft credit inquiry: There is no prequalifying option, meaning members have to submit a full application Higher APR for certain terms: Borrowers with terms of 36 months or more will receive a higher rate, starting at 14.79% 
Other important information:
 
Qualifying for a personal loan can be especially tricky if you’ve filed bankruptcy in the past. But if your bankruptcy has been discharged for at least 12 months, LendingPoint might be willing to work with you.
 
LendingPoint offers loans to borrowers in 49 states and Washington, DC with credit scores as low at 585. Qualified applicants can borrow up to $25,000 and interest rates start at 9.99% up to 35.99%. 
 Lower credit scores accepted if you satisfy other qualification criteria Past bankruptcy isn’t necessarily a deal killer as long as it was discharged at least 12 months ago No prepayment penalty applies if you want to pay off your loan early Lower maximum loan amount compared with other lenders Origination fees can be as high as 6%, depending on the state where you live Higher interest rates compared to the APR you might be offered elsewhere with better credit 
Other important information:
 
If you prefer to do business with a lender face-to-face, OneMain Financial may be a good fit. The lender has almost 1,600 branches in 44 states where it offers unsecured personal loans to borrowers with less-than-perfect credit. Interest rates start at 18% and qualified applicants may be able to borrow up to $20,000.
 Numerous branches available for borrowers who prefer to meet or pick up funds in person No prepayment penalty if you opt to pay off your loan early Soft credit pull used to check for prequalified offers High starting interest rate compared with some other subprime lenders Maximum loan amount of $20,000 is low compared with other personal loan providers Origination fees and late fees may be charged on top of interest costs 
Other important information:
 
Technically a credit union, anyone can join if they joinNational Military Family Organization or the Voices for America's Troops for $17 each. In addition to a myriad of banking products and services, PenFed Credit Union also offers personal loans for members who have a minimum credit score of 580. Plus, rates are competitive, starting at 6.49%.
 Low minimum loan amounts available starting at $500 No prepayment penalty if you opt to pay off your loan early Co-borrower may help you qualify for a more competitive rate Maximum loan amount of $20,000 is low compared with other personal loan providers Membership required in order to receive a personal loan Hard credit pull required since there is no prequalification option 
Other important information:
 
Rocket Loans is part of the Quicken family of companies and now offers same day funding for their personal loans. Applicants can check their initial rate without affecting their credit score and the ability to receive a rate discount by signing up for autopay.
 Potential to receive loan proceeds within the same business day Soft credit inquiry when checking initial rate No prepayment penalties Lender changes an origination fee that’s deducted from final loan amount No cosigners allowed Late payment and insufficient payment fees 
Other important information:
 
LendingClub is one of the most reputable peer-to-peer lending companies, helping to facilitate more than $55 billion in personal loans since 2007. The lender offers a pre-qualification option for applicants to check their rates without affecting their credit score, which starts at 10.68%.
 Personal loan amounts starting at $1,000 is a great option for those looking to borrow less money LendingClub offers joint loan applications for those who want to boost their chances of being approved for a more competitive rate No early prepayment penalties Loans aren’t available nationwide LendingClub has longer funding times—can be up to 10 business days—compared to other online lenders Borrowers are subject to origination fees 
Other important information:
 
Headquartered in San Francisco and founded in 2017, Upgrade offers those with bad credit the ability to take out a personal loan with a co-signer. Many other lenders that allow co-signers tend to have membership requirements or higher rates. Upgrade allows applicants to borrow up to $35,000 starting at a rate of 7.99%.
 Applicants can check their rate without it affecting their credit score Funding as soon as the next business day Ability to apply with a co-signer Lender charges an origination fee Low maximum loan amount compared to other lenders on our list A late $10 will be imposed if borrowers don’t pay within the grace period 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Upgrade
 
If you’re struggling with severe credit problems and need a small-dollar loan to get you through an unexpected financial emergency, a payday alternative loan (PAL) is worth considering. PALs are issued by some federally insured credit unions. You can locate a credit union near you at MyCreditUnion.gov.
 
The maximum amount you can borrow with a PAL is currently just $1,000. But the interest rate is capped at 28%, making PALs a more affordable option than payday loans and even some online personal loans for bad credit.
 Lower interest rates than payday loans and some online personal loans Low application fee is capped at a maximum of $20 nationwide Small maximum loan amount of $1,000 might not be sufficient to meet your borrowing needs Minimum membership period in the credit union might be required, depending on the lender 
Other important information:
 
The credit scores used by most lenders range from 300–850. If you have a FICO score under 670, you're considered a subprime borrower with a "fair" credit rating, according to Experian. The credit reporting company classifies a FICO score of less than 580 as "very poor."
 
It's important to understand that taking out a personal loan with bad credit can be quite expensive. Interest rates can often climb into the upper-30% range, based on your credit rating. Other obstacles you could face when you try to borrow with bad credit include lower loan amounts and shorter repayment terms. To help you compare the best loan options available, we've researched more than a dozen personal loans for bad credit. We compared interest rates, fees, qualification requirements, and other loan features.
 
As a reminder, when you have a FICO score under 670, you're considered a subprime borrower. If your FICO score is less than 580, your credit falls into the "very poor" range.
 
Every lender sets its own criteria (including credit score thresholds) for loan approval and pricing. That makes it difficult to predict precisely what APR you'll be offered for a personal loan if you have bad credit. Interest rates on personal loans can range from roughly 5.5% to 36%. If your credit rating is poor, you should expect to be offered rates on the higher end of that scale.
 You may also come across lenders who promise "guaranteed approval" or "no credit check" for bad credit personal loans. Promises like these should be a red flag. Legitimate lenders never make these guarantees, according to the Federal Trade Commission, or even say you're likely to qualify for a loan before you apply. 
Getting a personal loan with bad credit can be a challenge. Still, you may find multiple lenders willing to do business with you (albeit, typically at a higher interest rate). If you're searching for personal loan options with bad credit, there are two primary loan sources you may want to consider.
 
You can find a combination of the best personal loans for bad credit from both types of sources in the guide above.
 
When you have poor credit, small payday loans may be easier to qualify for. But they come at a very high cost. The average APR on a typical two-week payday loan of $100 is nearly 400%, according to the CFPB.
 
If you qualify for a personal loan with bad credit, you may be able to borrow money much more affordably instead of using a payday loan. Even an interest rate near 36%—the upper end of the range for most personal loans—costs far less than the average fees a payday lender may charge.
 
Additionally, numerous local credit unions now offer payday alternative loans (PALs). These loans may help borrowers with bad credit access more affordable short-term financing. The maximum interest rate on a PAL is 28%.
