
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
The oldest parts of Bank of America date back 240 years. With the merger of BankAmerica and NationsBank in 1998, it became the first coast-to-coast bank in the U.S. It is now a global financial services company that serves one out of every two households in America.
 
Bank of America serves approximately 66 million consumer and small business clients through its 4,300 branches. It is number one in consumer deposit market share in the U.S. and is the number one small business lender. This in-depth review of the retail banking giant can help you decide if its deposit accounts are right for you.
 Unparalleled access with 4,300 branches and 16,900 ATMs Low minimums to open checking or savings accounts Higher rates and lending discounts via Preferred Rewards No high-yield savings account options ATM fees not waived or reimbursed Noncompetitive certificate of deposit (CD) rates 
Bank of America is best for customers who value ease of access over higher interest rates. It may be particularly good for customers who want to:
 
As one of the world’s leading financial institutions, Bank of America offers an extensive array of deposit accounts, lending products, and investment choices.
 
Bank of America provides three checking accounts that can be opened with $100 or less.
 
Using another bank’s ATM will cost you $2.50 per transaction plus whatever the other bank charges. These fees are not waived or reimbursed with your Bank of America checking account.
 
When you use the bank’s debit card for purchases, you can enroll in Bank of America’s Keep the Change program to build your savings. It rounds up your purchases to the next dollar and transfers that amount to your savings account.
 
Customers have one savings account option: Bank of America Advantage Savings. This account provides tiered interest rates that grow with your relationship with the bank. It requires a $100 deposit to open the account.
 
The monthly fee of $8 can be waived by keeping a minimum daily balance of $500, linking this account to your Bank of America Advantage Relationship Banking checking account, or by becoming a Bank of America Preferred Rewards client. New accounts receive a waiver of the monthly fee for the first six months. Students who are enrolled in school and are under the age of 24 may also qualify for a waiver.
 
Bank of America offers standard term CDs with a $1,000 minimum deposit requirement. Standard CDs are available at terms ranging from one month to 10 years, with annual percentage yields (APYs) from 0.03% to 0.08%.
 
Featured CDs are promotional CDs that require a $10,000 minimum deposit. They have fewer term options, but customers can lock in a higher promotional APY.
 
Unless specifically noted, all CDs renew at the end of their term. Customers have a grace period of up to seven days after maturity, depending on the term of the CD, to cancel the renewal and withdraw without penalty.
 
The bank does charge an early withdrawal penalty if you close the CD before its maturity date. Penalties vary depending on the term of the CD.
 
Bank of America has numerous credit cards that earn cash back, travel rewards, or support charitable causes. Some credit cards earn higher rewards when you are enrolled in Preferred Rewards and maintain a larger relationship with the bank. For example, you can earn up to 75% more rewards on every purchase with the Bank of America Cash Rewards Visa.
 
The bank also offers exclusive deals when you use your debit or credit card to make purchases at participating retailers. You must manually activate these promotions online or through the bank’s mobile app before making your purchase. BankAmeriDeals earns “Coins” that equate to cash back on your transactions.
 
Bank of America also has a wide variety of other banking, lending, and investment accounts to meet your needs.
 
Customers can connect with Bank of America customer service in three ways: in person, over the phone, or online.
 
Phone support is available from 8 a.m. to 11 p.m. EST Monday through Friday and 8 a.m. until 8 p.m. EST on Saturday and Sunday at 1-800-432-1000. The bank has more than 4,300 branches at which you can schedule an appointment or simply walk in to speak with someone in person. Customers also have access to 16,900 ATMs.
 
Additionally, you can send customer service a message online through the bank’s mobile app or direct messages on Facebook or Twitter.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ The Bank of America mobile app is available for both Apple (4.8 stars, 2.3 million reviews as of July 1, 2020) and Android (4.7 stars, 721,981 reviews as of July 1, 2020) devices.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Bank of America has received several J.D. Power awards over the years. In 2020, the Bank of America Corporate, Commercial and Business Banking Contact Centers earned J.D. Power Certification for the 11th consecutive year.﻿﻿ The bank also received the top ranking for Retail Banking Advice in 2019.﻿﻿ Bank of America became the first company to achieve J.D. Power Mobile and Online Certification for Customer Experience in 2019.﻿﻿
 
Customers have many choices to conduct business with Bank of America. Accounts can be opened online, on mobile devices, in person, or over the phone. Once your accounts are established, you can perform online transfers, deposit checks through your mobile device, withdraw, or deposit at an ATM, and more.
 Bank of America is a good choice for customers who want the comfort of having a bank branch or an ATM close by. That convenience is offset by savings accounts and CDs that have lackluster interest rates. Although customers can earn additional rewards with their balances through Preferred Rewards, they may be better off with more-competitive interest rates on their savings at other banks. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Facebook.com. "Bank of America." Accessed July 1, 2020.