
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Barclays Bank is the U.S. subsidiary of Barclays PLC. It is located in Wilmington, Del., but its parent company began in 1690 and is headquartered in the U.K. in London. In the U.S. Barclays Bank is an online-only bank that offers competitive interest rates on deposit accounts and co-branded credit cards that earn cash back and rewards.
 Competitive interest rates No monthly fees or minimum opening deposit requirements Lucrative credit card rewards No brick-and-mortar branches No checking accounts Personal loans by invitation only 
Barclays Bank should appeal to most consumers who want an online bank account with competitive interest rates and no monthly fees. It may be a good fit if you:
 
Barclays Bank is an online-only bank that focuses on savings and CD deposit accounts. It also has credit cards and personal loans (by invitation only), but it does not offer checking accounts or other lending products.
 
Barclays’ high-yield savings account offers a competitive annual percentage yield (APY) of 0.50% that is substantially higher than the national average (as of October 14, 2020), though a bit less than the best online savings accounts currently going.﻿﻿ It does not have a minimum deposit requirement, and there are no monthly service fees. You can transfer funds online to and from other banks or set up direct deposit into your account.
 
Barclays offers CDs ranging from three months to five years. There are no monthly fees or minimum deposit amounts. At maturity your CD will automatically renew at the current interest available. The bank will send you an email alert 30 days before your CD matures as a reminder. You have a 14-day grace period to withdraw or add funds without penalty.
 
If you withdraw your CD before maturity, there is a penalty. For CD terms under 24 months, the penalty is 90 days simple interest. For terms of 24 months or longer, the penalty is 180 days simple interest. When the penalty is greater than the interest earned, the remaining amount will be deducted from your principal.
 
Barclays partners with numerous travel and lifestyle brands to issue credit cards offering cash back, rewards, and special promotions.
 
Airline Credit Cards
 
Hotel Credit Cards
 
Travel Credit Cards
 
Lifestyle Credit Cards
 
In addition to savings accounts, CDs, and credit cards, Barclays Bank does not offer any other banking products besides personal loans. However, you cannot apply for a personal loan online. The bank is currently only taking applications from customers who are targeted for these offers.
 
For bank accounts, customer service is available at 1-888-710-8756, Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. EST. Telephone customer service is not available on the weekends. You may also send a secure message online or through the mobile app.
 
There are two mobile apps available, depending upon the type of products you have with Barclays Bank—bank accounts versus credit cards. The deposit mobile app is available for both Apple (3.8 stars, 851 ratings) and Android (1.9 stars, 356 ratings), yet there are fewer than 1,000 downloads for either version.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
A mobile app for credit cards is also available and has been rated far more often. You can download it for Apple (2.3 stars, 2,300 ratings) or Android (4.2 stars, 10,171 ratings).﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
As an online bank, the best way to open an account or access your accounts are online or through the bank’s mobile app. Potential customers may find paper applications or links to apply through the co-branded partners of Barclays. For example, you may receive an application for the AAdvantage Aviator Red World Elite Mastercard while on an American Airlines flight.
 
Deposits into your savings account or CD can be made through online transfers from linked banks, remote deposits from the mobile app, or direct deposit. The app also allows you to view history, initiate transactions, and contact customer service.
 Barclays Bank is an appealing online bank to earn interest on your savings. It offers competitive interest rates without monthly fees or minimum balance requirements. The bank is best as a complement to your existing bank because Barclays does not offer checking accounts, loans, or other services you’d find at a full-service bank. The credit cards offered by Barclays can be a good fit for your wallet if its travel and lifestyle partners are appealing to you. A majority of its credit cards offer the ability to earn cash back or rewards on your daily purchases.