
Basic reparations benefits are automobile insurance benefits that provide medical, economic, and other loss coverage up to a predetermined limit. The terms basic reparations benefits (BRB), personal injury protection, and no-fault insurance are often used interchangeably. This coverage is known as no-fault because it pays out claims regardless of who is at fault in the accident. It applies to injuries sustained by the driver, passengers in the vehicle, and sometimes pedestrians.
 
Basic reparations benefits typically cover three types of costs: medical, income, and essential services.
 
Basic reparations benefits coverage differs from medical payments coverage in that it covers more than just medical expenses. It is typically more expensive than traditional auto insurance.
 
In some states, basic reparations benefits are mandatory, while in other states it is available but optional. Drivers are typically required to purchase basic reparations coverage in states that have no-fault insurance laws. The state sets a minimum amount of coverage that must be purchased, and the insurer is required to pay the benefit regardless of who was at fault.
 
There is a caveat to this type of coverage: drivers may lose their right to sue the other driver for damages. The states that have made basic reparations coverage compulsory have done so largely to limit the number of lawsuits filed against at-fault drivers.
 
In states that do not require drivers to purchase basic reparations coverage, injured drivers can seek compensation for injuries and damages from the negligent driver. For example, an injured driver may initiate a personal injury claim against the negligent driver. Because basic reparations coverage is considered optional, the injured party will have to successfully sue the negligent party to pay for medical expenses unless the driver has purchased basic reparatiaons benefits coverage.
 
Suppose a policy holder does not have basic reparations benefits coverage. In that case, their medical expenses will only be covered in the event of an at-fault accident or if the at-fault party cannot cover your injuries if they have medical payments on included in their policy.
