
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
BB&T Bank is one of the largest financial services companies in the U.S. It is headquartered in Winston-Salem, N.C., and operates more than 2,900 branches across 17 states. It began as a small bank in 1872 and now has more than $230 billion in assets.
 
In 2019 BB&T merged with SunTrust, another southeastern regional bank. This merger of equals created the sixth largest commercial bank in the U.S. The banks are in the process of integrating their systems and renaming themselves Truist Bank.﻿﻿ This in-depth review can help you decide if its deposit accounts are right for you.
 Open a checking or savings account with $100 or less Savings account with no minimum deposit or monthly fees Flexible options with CDs Uncompetitive interest rates on deposit accounts Limited geographic footprint Some rate information not available on website 
BB&T Bank should appeal to consumers living within the 17 states (and Washington, D.C.) where it has branches. It may be a good fit if you:
 
As a large full-service regional bank, BB&T offers an extensive menu of accounts and services to its customers. For most deposit accounts customers can choose from several options that fit their needs and budget.
 
BB&T Bank customers have several options for their checking needs. These include two standard checking accounts, a student account, a senior account, and a premium account.
 
Customers using the bank’s ATM card can use any of its 2,400 ATMs without a fee. If you use another bank’s ATM, BB&T Bank will charge you $3 per transaction.
 
There are three money market accounts available from BB&T.
 
There are three savings accounts offered by BB&T.
 
There are four types of CDs to choose from at BB&T.
 
CDs renew automatically at maturity at the current rates. For terms less than 32 days, there is a one-day grace period to withdraw or change the term without penalty. All other CDs have a 10-calendar-day grace period.
 
The bank charges an early withdrawal penalty if you withdraw money before the CD matures. Penalties vary depending upon the length of the CD term.
 
BB&T Bank has four credit card choices for customers. Each is designed with a specific consumer in mind and has benefits ideal for that audience. There is a balance transfer card, one with cash back, and a travel rewards card.
 
Customers may check for prequalified offers without affecting their credit score. Such offers may be available in as little as 60 seconds.
 
Here are the credit cards offered:
 
As a large regional bank, BB&T Bank offers a variety of accounts and services to meet the needs of its customers:
 
Customer service is available by phone at 1-800-226-5228, Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. EST. and Saturday from 8 a.m. to noon EST. It is closed on Sundays.
 
There are more than 2,900 branches across 17 states (and Washington, D.C.) for you to speak with a banker in person. Branches are located along the East Coast and as far west as Texas.
 
Your account is available 24 hours a day online and through BB&T’s mobile app, which is available for both Apple (4.8 stars, 346,400 ratings) and Android (4.7 stars, 56,699 ratings) mobile devices.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ The app allows you to view transaction history, personalize your accounts, pay bills, deposit checks, and more. It even has a budget feature that tracks your spending against your goals.
 
General questions can be answered through BB&T Bank’s Twitter account.﻿﻿ However, for security reasons, do not include your account number, Social Security number, or any other personally identifiable information.
 
You can open an account online, over the phone, or at a branch, of which there are more than 2,900 available in Washington, D.C., and the following states:
 BB&T Bank is a full-service regional bank well suited for customers who live near one of its branches. It has most of the account types that a customer would want, but its interest rates are not competitive with other banks. That being said, the bank does offer multiple checking account options to meet your needs and budget. It would do well as a primary bank for day-to-day needs.