
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
BB&T was founded in 1872 and is now part of Truist together with Lightstream, another personal loan lender, which is a division of SunTrust Bank. Currently headquartered in Winston-Salem, N.C. (but planning to move to new headquarters in Charlotte, N.C., once the Truist merger is completed), BB&T has branches in Washington, D.C., and 15 states.﻿﻿ To help you determine whether to apply for a personal loan from BB&T, we’ve looked at important and relevant details such as loan amounts, fees, and credit score requirements to see if BB&T meets your borrowing needs.
 
BB&T doesn't publish their personal loan APRs online; you will need to contact your local branch for current rates. BB&T offers loan amounts ranging from $3,500 to $50,000. Your loan amount depends on your credit history, loan term, and credit score. The loan repayment term may vary by state. While BB&T doesn’t disclose minimum credit score requirements, you may be more likely to qualify with a credit score of at least 660. If your credit score isn’t high, applying with a cosigner may increase your chances of approval.
 Minimal fees Fast funding times Co-signer allowed on applications No prequalification option Not available nationwide Need to visit a branch to close on loan 
You can use personal loan proceeds from BB&T for most purposes — home improvement projects, vacation expenses, and other kinds of major purchases. BB&T also allows you to use your personal loan for debt consolidation to help pay off existing high-interest loans from other lenders.
 
Most loans may be approved and funded within one business day. Depending on factors such as your creditworthiness, you might even be approved and funded within a few hours. 
 
BB&T doesn’t require you to be an existing customer, unlike many other banks. You do, however, need to head to one of its more than 1,700 brick-and-mortar locations to finalize your loan.
 
There is no prequalification option for those who apply for a personal loan with BB&T. You’ll need to submit a full application and be subject to a hard credit inquiry before finding out the rates and terms for which you may qualify. 
 
Consider carefully whether you’ll be able to meet the minimum credit requirements to take out a personal loan before applying, because, as noted above, that hard credit inquiry could negatively affect your credit score.
 
Here’s what you can expect:
 
1. Head to BB&T’s website to find a branch near you using its online locator tool. Enter your ZIP code, address, or city to pull up a list of available branches. Alternatively, you can call customer service at 800-226-5228 to find a branch.
 
3. Gather relevant documentation, such as proof of address and income, photo ID, and Social Security number before heading to the branch.
 
4. Schedule an appointment online to ensure that you don’t need to wait too long before seeing a loan officer.
 
5. Submit your loan application and additional documentation, if needed.
