
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
BBVA has a strong online banking presence and branches in seven states. Based in Birmingham, Alabama, the bank launched its first online offerings as far back as 1995.﻿﻿
 
In our in-depth review of BBVA bank, we'll look at the products and services available and whether it's a good fit for your banking needs.
 Full service banking options Cash bank rewards with some checking accounts Large ATM network Award-winning mobile app and online banking service High overdraft fees Low interest rates Branches in only a few states Few monthly transactions without a fee 
BBVA should appeal to consumers looking for a full-service online bank. It may be a good fit for customers who want to:
 
BBVA Bank has a full array of banking solutions available to appeal to a wide range of customers including:
 
BBVA Savings Account
 
A BBVA savings account is a basic savings account. It earns very little interest— 0.05% annual percentage yield (APY). Other account features include:﻿﻿
 There is a $15 monthly service fee with this account, which is waived if you set up an automatic monthly transfer of at least $25 from a BBVA checking account or maintain a daily balance of at least $500. 
Online Savings Account
 
BBVA's online savings account isn't much different from its standard account, other than not having a monthly maintenance fee. It also only earns 0.05% APY, much less than the best online savings accounts. Other account features include:﻿﻿
 
Premium Checking Account
 
Premium checking is the bank's only interest-bearing checking option, earning 0.05% APY. It also levies a monthly maintenance fee that is waived by keeping a daily balance of at least $4,000 or making at least $4,000 in direct deposits monthly. Other features include:﻿﻿
 
Online Checking Account
 
Another checking account option is BBVA's online checking. An account can be opened with a $25 initial deposit. Other features include:﻿﻿
 
Online checking also includes access to Simple Cash Back. Customers earn cash back rewards for qualifying purchases using a BBVA debit card. ﻿﻿
 
Free Checking Account
 
BBVA's free checking is a basic checking account. The account does offer several free perks, similar to its other checking accounts such as:﻿﻿
 
You can open an account with a $25 initial deposit. Account holders also have access to the Simply Cash Back program. The account offers several add on features for additional costs:﻿﻿
 
BBVA’s money market accounts offer an APY of 0.13%
 
Rates are based on standard rates set by BBVA, which may change, depending where you reside.
 
You can open a money market account with a $25 deposit. There is a $15 monthly service charge which is waived if you either keep a daily balance of $10,000 or set up an automatic monthly transfer of at least $25 from a BBVA checking account.﻿﻿
 Money market accounts have a limit of six free withdrawals per month. 
BBVA offers CDs online and from local branches. To access local CD rates, stop in or call your local BBVA branch, or call BBVA at 1-844-BBVA USA. Online CDs are only available in four term lengths, all with lower interest rates than offered by the top online banks.
 
BBVA CDs require a $500 minimum deposit and have no monthly maintenance fees. Terms available are 11, 12, 18, and 36 months.﻿﻿
 
There are early withdrawal penalties for pulling funds from CDs before your term ends:
 
BBVA offers four credit cards, including cards that earn rewards and a secured credit card, perfect for building credit:
 
All credit card options, except the BBVA Rewards Card, are only available in Ala., Ariz., Calif., Colo., Fla., N.M., and Texas.﻿﻿
 All of the rewards credit cards feature bonuses for new customers. 
BBVA also offers other products to complement its personal banking accounts including:
 
BBVA has several customer service phone numbers, depending on where you live and the service you need. For customer service or to open an account in Ala., Ariz., California, Colo., Fla., N.M., and Texas call 1-844-228-2872. In all other states, the number to call is 1-866-534-4482.
 
For online and mobile banking the number is 1-800-273-1057 and for credit cards 1-800-239-5175. Support is also available online or at bank branches if you happen to live near one.﻿﻿
 
BBVA's mobile app, 4 stars on Google Play and 4.8 stars on iTunes, gives customers access to:﻿﻿
 
Customers can open an account with BBVA online via its website. Select bank accounts can be opened in person at a BBVA bank branch or by phone.﻿﻿
 
To open an account, customers need to verify their identity by providing info from one of the following sources:
 
Opening a new account requires a deposit from a debit or credit card, an account at another bank, or an existing BBVA account.﻿﻿
 BBVA provides customers a full-service online banking experience with options that fit a wide range of needs. But its interest-bearing accounts don't have the higher rates you associate with top online banks. Most of its bank branches are located in the southwest region of the U.S., which limits customers looking for both online and local banking services. Customers face monthly transaction limits with some BBVA accounts. BBVA Bank offers enough variety and value through its banking services to warrant at least a long look from most potential customers. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 BBVA. "BBVA Timeline in the USA."Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. “Checking Accounts.” Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "BBVA Savings." Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "Online Savings Account." Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "Premium Checking Account." Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "Online Checking Account." Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "Free Checking." Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "BBVA Money Market Account." Accessed April 23, 2020. BBVA. "Certificates of Deposit." Accessed April 23, 2020.