
Royal Dutch Shell (RDS.A, RDS.B), also known simply as Shell, is one of the oldest and most recognizable brands in the world. The company was established in 1897 as the Shell Transport and Trading company and sold kerosene to customers in Asia.﻿﻿ The company operates in 70 countries globally and produces more than 3.7 million barrels of oil equivalent daily.﻿﻿ Here we look at Shell's credit card and other payment options and the benefits they offer.
 
Shell offers credit and payment cards in seven countries: Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Malaysia, Norway, the Philippines and the United States.﻿﻿ Below are the card programs available in the U.S.:
 
Shell maintains a website for online applications. Depending on the card or program, required personal information will include name, address, contact phone number, driver's license information, checking account and other information required to perform a credit check.﻿﻿
 
Below are the benefits each card program offers:
 
Customers who frequent Shell stations would benefit from any of the company's card offerings, with the exception of the prepaid card. The Shell Fuel Rewards MasterCard would be good for any person who frequently uses a credit card to make purchases and pays off their bill each month. Those who use a car to travel regularly on business or for other reasons might find Shell's cards beneficial.
 
There are a number of competing card programs that offer discounts on gas purchases. These include:
 
The Shell Fuel Rewards Card and the Shell Fuel Rewards MasterCard have an annual percentage rate (APR) of 26.74% on purchases and 29.99% on cash advances. Citigroup charges up to $38 for late or returned payments.﻿﻿
 
Although the Shell Saver Card has no enrollment or annual fees, users could face a non-sufficient funds charge when funds are not available in the user's linked checking account.﻿﻿
 
Shell offers several options for people who want to save on gas purchases. Both of the company's credit cards offer savings at the pump and inside Shell stations. However, you don't need a credit card to accumulate rewards. Customers can also sign up for Shell's loyalty program to receive discounts on gas purchases.
 Royal Dutch Shell. "Brand History." Accessed June 28, 2020. Royal Dutch Shell. "Who We Are." Accessed June 28, 2020. Royal Dutch Shell. "Shell Credit Cards." Accessed June 28, 2020. Citigroup. "Introducing the new Shell Fuel Rewards Credit Cards." Accessed June 28, 2020. Royal Dutch Shell. "Shell Saver Card." Accessed June 28, 2020. Royal Dutch Shell. "Shell Refillable Card." Accessed June 28, 2020. Royal Dutch Shell. "How It Works." Accessed June 28, 2020. Royal Dutch Shell. "Ways to Pay." Accessed June 28, 2020. ExxonMobil. "Smart Card." Accessed June 28, 2020. PenFed Credit Union. "Platinum Rewards Visa Signature." Accessed June 28, 2020. Citigroup. "Citi Costco Anywhere Visa Credit Card." Accessed June 28, 2020. Citigroup. "Shell Drive for Five Credit Card Disclosures," Page 1. Accessed June 28, 2020.