
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
If you're looking for a way to generate some interest on your money and don't necessarily need access to it for a few years, a 3-year certificate of deposit (CD) might be worth a look. To help you find the highest rate possible, we continually analyze rate data from the 200+ banks and credit unions that accept customers nationwide and rank the best-paying 3-year CDs on the market today.
 
Since the top rates are sometimes a product of special promotional certificates with odd terms, CDs with durations from 30 to 41 months are eligible for our 3-year rankings, with minimum deposit requirements of up to $25,000.
 
In cases where more than one institution pays the same top rate, we've prioritized CDs by the shortest term, then the CD requiring a smaller minimum deposit, and if still a tie, by which CD has a milder penalty for early withdrawal.
 
Our full ranking of the top-paying nationally available 3-year CDs is listed below, including details about minimum deposits and early withdrawal penalties. For credit union CDs, information is also provided on how to easily join the credit union.
 
Certificates of deposit, or CDs, are savings products that pay the customer interest in exchange for agreeing to leave their deposit with the bank or credit union for a fixed period of time.
 
Most depository institutions offer a variety of CDs with different maturity dates; typically, the shortest ones will last three months while the longest ones range up to ten years, though five years is the longest term at most institutions. In theory, the longer the duration of the deposit, the higher the rate the institution is willing to offer.
 
CDs are considered safe, conservative investments because their rate of return is pre-determined and guaranteed to remain locked for the full term. In addition, virtually all CDs are offered by FDIC-insured banks, or by credit unions insured through the NCUA. As a result, deposits of up to $250,000 are protected, even if the financial institution faces liquidity problems.
 
Most CDs don't allow you to add funds after the initial deposit, making it a less favorable savings vehicle for those who wish to make periodic contributions. But CD accounts are well-suited for parking cash you won't need for a while and that you want invested reliably and essentially risk-free.
 
Usually, CDs are set to automatically renew at maturity. But you'll be notified of the maturity date in advance and given the opportunity to tell the bank you'd like to do something different with the money, such as withdraw it or transfer it to another institution. Fortunately, if you miss the maturity date by a few days, most banks and credit unions afford a grace period of a few days during which you can still withdraw your funds without penalty.
 
It's important to note that CD rates can vary significantly from one bank or credit union to another. Indeed, the top certificate rates nationwide are typically three and five times the industry average for a CD of the same duration. So it's critical you shop around.
 
Each CD has a pre-established rate of interest that the bank or credit union pays on the deposit amount. The rate is usually published as an annual percentage yield, or APY, which reflects the total earnings on the account over a year's time, given the actual interest rate and the frequency with which that interest is compounded.
 
Many CDs use daily compounding, in which the annual interest rate is divided by 365 and applied to the balance each day. The following day, the daily interest rate is applied to this new balance, increasing the yield in the account. The amount of interest that has accrued will typically be credited monthly or quarterly.
 
To provide a disincentive to CD holders from taking their money out the account before maturity, all banks and credit unions have a early withdrawal penalty policy. An early withdrawal will cause you to forfeit some of your interest earnings — 3 to 12 months' worth of interest is common — but the penalties vary widely by institution, with some onerous enough to eat into principal.
 
Some banks and credit unions offer penalty-free CDs, although they typically offer a lower rate and may be "all or nothing" propositions. If that's the case, you would need to pull out your entire balance and close the account if you want to withdraw early. Because of their lower rates, no penalty-free options make the cut in our ranking of the top-paying nationally available 3-years CDs.
 
The rate paid on CDs is determined by each bank and credit union and involves their particular need for deposits and the time horizon of their deposit strategy. However, the actions of the Federal Reserve loom large in the equation. The federal funds rate, which is determined by the central bank's Federal Open Market Committee, influences how much banks have to pay in order to borrow from each other. That, in turn, influences how much individual depository institutions are willing to pay consumers for their deposit funds.
 
When the Fed's rate is low, banks will offer lower yields on interest-bearing accounts. When interest rates go up, however, they tend to pay higher rates in order to attract customers.
