
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
If you don't need immediate access to your cash, certificates of deposit, or CDs, can be a good way to safely build interest. And if your saving horizon is short, a 6-month CD might provide the perfect deposit vehicle.
 
Drawing on the most current rate data from about 200 banks and credit unions that offer certificate products nationwide, we've ranked the highest-paying CDs with approximately 6-month terms (includes terms from 5-9 months). Those requiring a minimum deposit of up to $25,000 are eligible for our list.
 
In cases where more than one institution pays the same top rate, we've prioritized CDs by the shortest term, then the CD requiring a smaller minimum deposit, and if still a tie, by which CD has a milder penalty for early withdrawal.
 
Detailed information on these top-paying nationally available 6-month CDs is provided below, including specifics about minimum deposits and early withdrawal penalties. For credit union CDs, information is also provided on how to easily join the credit union.
 
Certificates of deposit, or CDs, are financial products that provide a fixed rate of interest on your deposit as long as you leave your money with the bank or credit union for a specified length of time.
 
CDs come in maturities as short as three months and as long as ten years. In general, the longer the duration of the CD, the higher the rate of interest that the financial institution is willing to offer. So while 6-month CDs—and even 9-month ones—don't tie up your money for very long, they also don't offer the kind of yields you would find with a longer maturity.
 
Virtually all CDs are offered by federally insured banks or credit unions. Almost all bank certificates are protected by FDIC insurance, while those offered by credit unions are typically guaranteed by the NCUA. That means deposits up to $250,000 are secure, even if the institution itself falls into financial trouble. It's always a good idea to check that the bank or credit union offers this protection -- just look for the FDIC or NCUA logo.
 
Depository institutions set their own interest rates for CDs, and those rates can differ dramatically from one bank or credit union to another. According to the data we compiled on dozens of institutions across the country, the top-paying CD providers offer yields that are up to five times higher than the industry average for products of the same duration. Therefore, it's a good idea to shop around and find one that pays on the higher end of the spectrum.
 
Every CD has a specific maturity, the date when you're allowed to withdraw your funds without paying a penalty. Banks and credit unions typically offer a range of certificates that appeal to customers with either a short-term savings horizon (as is the case with a 6-month CD) or a long-term horizon.
 
For each CD duration, the institution will publish the annual percentage yield, or APY, which reflects the percentage of interest paid on the account, given the nominal interest rate and the frequency with which that interest is compounded.
 
Most CDs use compound interest, which slightly increases the yield. In the case of a certificate that compounds daily, the annual interest rate is divided by 365 and multiplied by the balance to determine the interest payout. That daily interest accrual is then added to the balance when calculating the next day's interest. Interest is usually credited to the account monthly or quarterly.
 
Most financial institutions will deduct some of the interest that's accrued in your account if you withdraw funds from a CD before the maturity date. In the case of a 6-month CD, losing three, or even six, months' worth of interest is fairly typical. So there's a strong incentive to leave your money untouched until the certificate reaches maturity.
 
Some places offer "penalty-free" CDs, but there's a rub: they tend to offer lower yields than standard CDs. What's more, they often require you to pull out the entire balance and close the account if you make an early withdrawal.
 
Indeed, all banks and credit unions charge a penalty for early CD withdrawals. Investigating whether an institution's penalty policy is mild, reasonable, or onerous is important before you commit to a CD, and can help you choose between two otherwise comparable certificates.
 
Even in a low-interest rate environment, CDs tend to offer significantly higher yields than traditional savings and money market accounts.
 
For that reason, 6-month CDs may be a good option if you know that you won't need access to your funds for at least six to nine month. That's a cohort that includes people saving for a down payment on a home or setting aside funds for a big trip.
