
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Americans’ love affair with the automobile has been going on since the introduction of the Ford Model T in the early 20th century, and the thirst for gasoline has fueled our quest for independence and exploration. For those who drive frequently, gasoline purchases can be a major expense category, so it’s not surprising that gas rewards are attractive to many credit card users and often a deciding factor in the cards they choose.
 
We’ve taken a look at the cards in the market that offer bonus rewards for gasoline purchases and ranked them accordingly. We also carefully considered the security features of cards in this category because of the heightened risk of fraud that consumers can experience with gasoline transactions.
 Earn 50,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles after spending $2,500 in purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. 
The Citi AAdvantage Platinum Select Mastercard World Elite is our choice for best overall gas rewards credit card. That's because in addition to its rewards on American Airlines flight purchases, it offers 2 miles per dollar on all gasoline spending. And, while 2X rewards on the gas category may not seem that impressive, we estimate that American Airlines miles are currently worth an average of 2.32 cents each, giving gas purchases an average return of over 4.6% - which is actually quite impressive. That, plus the other benefits of this card make it an excellent primary card to carry if you want to earn award flights on American Airlines.
 Earn 130,000 Hilton Honors Bonus Points with the Hilton Honors American Express Surpass(R) Card after you use your new Card to make $2,000 in eligible purchases within the first 3 months of Card Membership. 
The Hilton Honors American Express Surpass Card is our choice for the best hotel card that offers gas rewards because of its generous and unlimited 6X points per dollar on U.S. gas station purchases and the value of Hilton Honors points. It also offers 6X points on purchases at U.S. restaurants and U.S. supermarkets so it can be an excellent primary for those who want to leverage these major spending categories along with Hilton purchases (at 12X points per dollar) to earn award nights with the hotel chain. There is a $95 annual fee but that should be easily justified by its bonus rewards on spending.
 $100 statement credit when you spend $1,500 in the first 90 days. 
The PenFed Platinum Rewards Visa Signature is our best gas credit card for rewards points because of its rich, ongoing and unlimited 5X points earnings on all gasoline purchases. The card also provides bonus earnings on grocery purchases with a base rate on all other purchases plus a $100 statement credit after meeting initial spending requirements. PenFed Credit Union membership is required for approval.
 
The Costco Anywhere Visa tops our list among wholesale club credit cards that offer gasoline rewards. With its 4% cash back rewards on gasoline up to $7,000 per year cardholders can earn and apply significant rewards to apply to future Costco purchases. The Costco Anywhere Visa is available at no annual for existing Costco members, otherwise a $55 annual Costco membership fee is charged upon approval.
 Earn 100,000 Marriott Bonvoy points after you use your new Card to make $5,000 in purchases within your first 3 months of Card Membership. Earn up to $150 in statement credits within your first 6 months of Card Membership for all eligible purchases on your Card on U.S. Advertising in select Media. Plus receive complimentary Marriott Bonvoy Platinum Elite status for one year (February 1, 2021-January 31, 2022). Offer ends 1/13/21. 
We chose the Marriott Bonvoy Business American Express Card as the best business gas rewards card due to its ongoing and unlimited 4X points earnings at U.S. gas stations and the excellent per-point value of Marriott Bonvoy points when redeemed toward hotel stays. This card can be a good pick for small-business owners who spend a significant amount on gas each month and can further augment their earnings through Marriott stays, which earn 6X points.
 Earn a $300 statement credit after you spend $3,000 in purchases on your new Card within the first 6 months. Offer Expires 12/10/2020. 
The Blue Cash Preferred Card from American Express is our choice for best gas card offering cash back rewards due to its unlimited 3% earnings at U.S. gas stations - allowing you to fuel up at the retailer of your choice. Many rewards credit cards cap their bonus points or cash back on gasoline purchases so this is a good option for those that want to maximize earnings in this category. There is a $95 annual fee but this can be easily justified with regular spending across its bonus categories.
 
A gas credit card allows a cardholder to earn points, cash back, or discounts on gasoline purchases—either with specific gasoline retailers or at any gas station, depending on the type of card.
 
Gas credit cards come in two main types: co-branded cards that are offered by partnering banks and oil companies and general rewards cards from the major card issuers. Co-branded gasoline credit cards offer rewards or per-gallon discounts on gas purchases from specific chains, such as BP or ExxonMobil. By contrast, general rewards credit cards with a gasoline rewards component allow cardholders to earn points or cash back wherever they buy gas. In addition to gasoline-related rewards, general rewards credit cards typically offer bonus rewards on other purchase categories or at least pay a base rate on all other purchases, making them a better all-around deal for the consumer.
 Compelling rewards for gas purchases. Often provide bonus rewards for other spending categories. Interest rates can be higher. Per gallon discounts may mean less return if gas prices increase. 
Whether you're using a general rewards card with a gas rewards bonus or a co-branded gas credit card, it's important to put all your eligible gasoline purchases on that card. It’s also imperative to pay your balance in full each month, as the interest rates these cards charge can often dwarf any rewards you'll earn.
 
For the average American, gasoline purchases account for more than 3% of annual household spending, or nearly $2,000 a year, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. With the right rewards card, this spending can be leveraged to potentially save hundreds of dollars a year. Gas prices tend to rise and fall with supply and demand and geo-political forces, but commuting costs are always an unwelcome part of most people’s monthly expenses. Gas credit cards can help offset part of the pain of getting to and from work, or add to the pleasure of vacation road trips.
 
So, whether your gas rewards credit card gives you a discount of a certain number of cents off per gallon, a fixed percentage in cash back, or bonus points on the total when you fill up your tank, remembering to use it consistently at the pump will yield the most value. And, if your rewards card provides bonus earnings on other categories of spending (like groceries or travel), it could work as your primary card for all transactions. To maximize the value of a gas card, or any rewards credit card, it’s important to shift as much spending as possible from cash, check, and debit card transactions to the rewards credit card. That way you can earn some level of cash back or points on every transaction.
 
As mentioned, there are several varieties of credit cards with gasoline rewards. Most major gasoline retailers have signs or even take-one applications in their stations for their co-branded credit cards, and credit card issuers often send out or advertise promotions for their own gas rewards cards. So you're likely to have any number of cards to choose from.
 
To know whether you might qualify for a particular card, it's useful to know your credit score. If you don’t already know your score, there are free resources online where you can obtain it. Most rewards credit cards require good or excellent credit, but there are options for those with fair or even bad credit.
 
Once you have an idea of which cards you could probably qualify for, consider your buying habits. Do you patronize a particular gas station brand more than the others? If so, that company's co-branded card could make sense for you. That's especially true with major companies like ExxonMobil or Shell, which have large national footprints and are likely to have stations wherever your travels take you. But compare your potential savings with that card to what you might get with a general rewards card that's less restrictive in where you can use it. Bear in mind, though, that some general rewards cards that offer generous bonus cash back or points exclude gasoline sold at big box warehouse stores like BJ’s, Costco, or Sam’s Club. Others restrict their bonus rewards to U.S. gas stations only.
 
Ultimately, the best way to compare cards is to run the numbers on how much you could earn based on each card's rewards program and the amount of money you typically spend on gas each year.
 Some co-branded gas rewards credit cards offer per-gallon discounts, such as 10 cents off each gallon. While those kinds of discounts may seem attractive when gas prices are low, they are worth less on a percentage basis when gas prices rise. For that reason, a card with a fixed percentage of cash back or points based on the dollars you spend could be a better deal. 
The best way to maximize your earnings on a gas rewards card is to always use it when you buy gasoline or any other related purchases that qualify for bonus rewards. If you're using a co-branded gas card that provides rewards only at a specific retailer, try to patronize that retailer as often as possible and consider pairing that card with another one that offers rewards on all your other spending.
 
If you have a general rewards card that provides bonus cash back or points on gasoline category purchases, you're free to fill up anywhere—but make sure you know if the card excludes the gas pumps at certain major retailers, such as Walmart or Costco. General rewards cards typically make a good primary card to use for all your purchases and often include bonus rewards for other spending categories like groceries or dining. So, beyond maximizing rewards on gas purchases, a general rewards card can optimize earnings across multiple spending categories, resulting in greater rewards in total.
 Carrying a balance on any credit card can be expensive, and that's especially true with gas rewards credit cards, which often have high interest rates. Interest charges can quickly offset any rewards you earn, so it's important to pay your balance in full each month. 
Gas credit cards are best suited for people who spend a fair amount of money each month on gas, such as anyone with a long daily commute. People who live in downtown urban areas and don’t drive much—or who don’t even own a car—will get more value from other types of cards.
 
Investopedia pledges to provide exhaustive and objective information about all credit cards offered in the United States. Reviews and rankings are created by our editorial team independently and impartially, without regard to any financial relationships Investopedia may have with credit card issuers or their affiliates.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources.
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools to monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice.
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth.
 
When all of a particular card’s features have received a score, we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for that card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as balance-transfer).
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, for balance-transfer cards we apply significantly higher weight to such key category attributes as interest rates or fees than to travel-specific features such as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance, which might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as travel-rewards cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs, along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands.
