
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
While most people rely on cars to get them where they need to go, some invest more time, energy, and finances into vehicles than others. If you're the proud owner of a classic car, you know exactly what this means.
 
Typically, cars that are more than 25 years old and hold some historical significance fall under the category of a "classic car." Sometimes these cars are old school American muscle, while other times they're limited edition vehicles. But whether your collectible car is a 1969 Dodge Charger or a 1954 Chevrolet truck, chances are your classic car's value is only going up while its parts continue to wear.
 
While most types of car insurance only cover vehicles that deteriorate in value, classic car insurance is set up to do the exact opposite—protect your investment and make sure that your car is still around for years to come. Because of this, classic and antique cars require special policies.
 
Like the cars it's made for, a great classic car insurance policy can be hard to find. After mulling over data for eight specialty insurance companies and 20 major car insurance providers who offer classic car policies, we created a list of the ones with the best classic car coverage out there for the price.
 
With more than 50 years of experience in the specialty insurance sector, American Modern knows the ins and outs of insuring classic cars, antique autos, and other collectible vehicles. You may not have heard of this lesser-known company, but American Modern's A+ ratings with the Better Business Bureau and A.M. Best can give you peace of mind when you consider the company's policies.﻿﻿
 Available nationwide Agreed value determined before you sign the policy Discounts of up to 45% available May not cover high risk drivers Some customers complain about length of claims processing 
American Modern Classic Car Insurance is known as one of the most inclusive policies out there. Its classic auto and collector car insurance policies cover the following types of vehicles:﻿﻿
 
Classic car and antique auto policies with American Modern always include bodily injury and property damage liability, collision and comprehensive, plus uninsured motorist and medical payments/personal injury protection.﻿﻿
 
American Modern offers several great discounts that can save drivers up to 45%. These discounts include:﻿﻿
 
American Modern insurance is licensed and available in all 50 states. However, the insurer does state that it has the right to refuse coverage for drivers based on their risk, so drivers with a history of accidents, DUIs, or other issues may not be able to obtain classic car insurance through American Modern.
 
Also, since it is a smaller insurance company, some customers have experienced long waits for claims processing, which can be frustrating if you're working with a busy body shop that specializes in antique autos.﻿﻿
 
As a specialty insurance provider, American Modern sits down with you to determine your car's agreed value before finalizing a policy. You also get an "inflation guard" so that your policy scales as your car increases in value.﻿﻿
 
In addition, American Modern offers different policy pricing based on mileage, so you'll pay less if your car is a collectible that spends most of its time in the garage. Mileage plans span from 1,000 miles per year to unlimited, giving you plenty of wiggle room depending on where you plan to go in your classic car.﻿﻿
 
Finally, American Modern offers guaranteed nationwide roadside assistance and flatbed towing, so you never have to worry about getting stranded in the event that your car acts temperamental while you're on the road.﻿﻿
 
Other perks include:﻿﻿
 
State Farm offers fairly competitive rates and coverage options for classic cars. It is one of the few car insurance companies that still relies on knowledgeable local agents to help you out with claims and other needs along the way.
 Coverage available nationwide $500 in spare parts coverage provided Rates based on use Few unique discounts and perks for classic car owners Many limitations on coverage criteria 
For State Farm's Collector and Classic Car Insurance policy, your vehicle only needs to meet one of the following criteria:﻿﻿
 
Like most of its other car insurance policies, State Farm offers all of the basic types of coverage for classic cars, including:﻿﻿
 
Additionally, State Farm offers the same unique coverage needs for classic autos and antique cars, like agreed value pricing, spare parts coverage (up to $500), and pricing based on usage.﻿﻿
 
Unfortunately, State Farm doesn't offer any unique discounts for classic car owners. It does have many standard discounts for safe drivers, safe vehicles, and customer loyalty. Since exact discounts vary from state to state, check with a local State Farm agent or visit the State Farm website to find out what discounts you may qualify for.
 
State Farm's Classic Car coverage is available in all 50 states. In addition to the eligibility restrictions based on age, State Farm also limits all classic cars it insures to meet the following criteria:﻿﻿
 
Beyond the emergency roadside assistance and spare parts coverage up to $500, State Farm doesn't offer many unique perks for classic car owners. With that being said, State Farm's rates are comparable to most other specialty providers of classic and antique car insurance, and the company ranked third out of all national brands in J.D. Power's 2020 Insurance Shopping Study.﻿﻿
 
Whether you own a 1950s muscle car or an antique auto, Safeco Insurance offers policies that let you drive your classic car as much (or as little) as you'd like. And, as a subsidiary of Liberty Mutual, you get the peace of mind of having a specialty car insurance policy provided by a major company with an A+ Better Business Bureau rating and serious financial strength.﻿﻿
 No major mileage restrictions Several unique discounts for classic car owners Great coverage and perks Not available in all 50 states Limited to classic cars and antique autos with numerous restrictions 
Safeco's Classic Car Insurance covers classic cars, modified collector cars, reproductions, replicas, restorations, modern classic cars, and antique autos. Unlike many other classic car policies that set mileage restrictions, Safeco's classic car insurance policy allows you to drive up to 10,000 miles per year, which makes it a great choice for muscle car owners who want to use their car regularly. You establish an agreed value when you sign up for coverage.﻿﻿
 
When it comes to specific coverage within your policy, Safeco offers classic car owners:﻿﻿
 
Finally, Safeco offers great roadside assistance coverage that includes towing to the nearest qualified repair shop, basic emergency services (i.e. flat tire help or fuel delivery), and the option to elect flatbed towing.﻿﻿
 
Even though it's not a specialty car insurance company, Safeco offers several great discounts on its classic car insurance policies. You can receive discounts for:﻿﻿
 
Safeco car insurance isn't available in Delaware, Hawaii, New Jersey, Rhode Island or the District of Columbia. It also restricts classic car coverage to automobiles and street vehicles, meaning policies will not cover other vintage vehicles like motorcycles, tractors, or retired military vehicles. Futhermore, Safeco's classic car policies will not cover kit cars, cars that are less than 50% restored, racing vehicles, or cars with nitrous oxide engines.﻿﻿
 
The biggest perk is the ability to drive extended miles. Safeco also allows you to insure entire collections of classic cars, with the option to customize coverage on each car or select the standard policies on them all. It also uses your agreed value in the event of a total loss, and will renegotiate that agreed value if the value of your car increases over time.﻿﻿
 
Finally, Safeco is one of the few major car insurance companies that will allow you to bundle classic car coverage with other types of insurance—this can save you money.﻿﻿
 
Hagerty has specialized in classic car insurance since 1984. Not only does the company offer great rates with incredible perks, but the owners re-invest back into the classic car community too. With unique coverage for restoration projects as well as staff members dedicated to helping you find parts, Hagerty is a restoration lover's dream for car insurance.
 Special coverage for restoration projects and cars under construction High spare parts and tools coverage compared to other companies Many perks specifically for classic cars Strict requirements for coverage Will not insure classic cars used daily 
As a specialty car insurance company, Hagerty offers unique coverage policies for classic cars and antique autos, including classic cars from 1979 and older, limited edition vehicles (including supercars), hot rods, replicas, retired commercial or military vehicles, and even specialty motorsport vehicles.﻿﻿
 
When it comes to types of coverage, Hagerty offers:﻿﻿
 
Additionally, Hagerty provides some unique coverage that applies specifically to classic cars:﻿﻿
 
As a specialty insurance company, Hagerty doesn't offer much in the way of discounts. But members of Hagerty's Drivers Club can take advantage of discounts on auto shows, parts, and accessories.﻿﻿
 
Hagerty classic car insurance is available in all 50 states and Canada, but the company does maintain some fairly strict limitations when it comes to coverage. For starters, it will not insure high risk drivers. This includes drivers with DUIs, speeding violations, or other reckless driving charges in the past three years.﻿﻿
 
Furthermore, Hagerty requires that when not in use, your collectible car is stored in a garage, barn, or similar type of storage location. The company will not insure classic cars used daily either—in fact, Hagerty requires that you have another regular-use vehicle that's insured for it to even offer you coverage for your classic car.﻿﻿
 
Unlike most other classic car insurance providers, Hagerty is willing to insure cars with little as 20% of their original parts. The company will also insure cars undergoing restoration and will cover new purchases for up to 30 days before you add them to your policy. Because of this, Hagerty is really the best choice for anyone who buys collectible cars in less-than-pristine condition and restores them.﻿﻿
 
Another big perk that Hagerty offers is expert claims service. Not only does the company specialize in classic cars, but there are also staff members on hand to help you track down hard-to-find parts. For rare or dated vehicles, this can be an amazing asset.﻿﻿
 
Although policies for both classic cars and everyday vehicles offer many of the same types of coverage, there are several ways in which classic car insurance differs from the types of policies offered on other vehicles.
 
First and foremost, since classic cars often increase in value rather than depreciate as they age, the valuation process works in a very different way. In fact, many classic car policies use what is called "agreed value" instead of sticker price or other determination methods. This agreed value takes into account current market values as well as all of the investment you've put into the car through restoration or upgrades.﻿﻿
 
Furthermore, classic car coverage typically costs less because companies place mileage caps or usage agreements on their policies. In most cases, you won't be driving your antique auto or classic muscle car to work every day, which means that the liability is lower for car insurance companies and as a result don't charge you as much in premiums.
 
Finally, classic car coverage amounts change more frequently than a typical policy since classic cars gain value over time and also further increase in value as you do further work to them.﻿﻿
 
Because of these differences, classic car coverage often comes with entirely different restrictions and expectations than most other car insurance policies, like mileage restrictions, storage requirements, and other unique considerations that are needed when insuring these types of cars.
 
Insurance for classic cars costs an average of 36% less than standard car insurance policies. While exact rates vary based on the specifics of your car, location, and driving history, chances are you'll spend several hundred dollars less per year on classic car insurance than you would with a standard insurance policy.﻿﻿
 
Yes, and in most cases classic car insurance policies will require you to carry full coverage due to the nature of the vehicles. Because classic cars hold such high value and repairs can be much more costly, it's actually in your best interest to carry full coverage that includes collision and comprehensive as well as your state's minimum requirements of liability insurance.
 
While specifics vary between insurance companies, classic cars typically must be:﻿﻿
 
Additionally, these cars are usually expected to be in some sort of restored condition with a certain percentage of original parts, and should hold some sort of historical value.
 
Chances are that if you own a classic car, you've invested large amounts of time, energy, and money into your vehicle. It's essential to give your prized possession the protection it needs and deserves with classic car insurance. The above options are great companies to check out so that you have peace of mind while you enjoy that Sunday drive in your classic car.
 
When selecting our top car insurance recommendations for classic cars, we evaluated over 25 car insurance companies who offer classic car insurance based on several metrics, including coverage options, financial strength, claims satisfaction ratings, and customer reviews from websites. We also compared advertised rates and discounts on each companies website plus data on car enthusiast websites like The Truth About Cars, Car and Driver, and more. Our analysis is meant to provide you with a great wealth of information, but we definitely encourage you to shop around before committing to one provider for your classic car insurance needs.
 Better Business Bureau. “American Modern Property and Casualty Insurance Company.” Accessed Sept. 9, 2020. American Modern. “Collector Car Insurance.” Accessed Sept. 9, 2020. American Modern. “Collector Car Insurance Details.” Accessed Sept. 9, 2020. American Modern. “Protect Your Customer’s Dream Car With One of the Industry’s Most Inclusive Programs.” Accessed Sept. 9, 2020.   State Farm. “Collector & Classic Car Insurance.” Accessed Sept. 9, 2020. J.D. Power. “2020 U.S. Insurance Shopping Study.” Accessed Sept. 9, 2020.