
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Airline frequent-flyer miles represent one of the first consumer loyalty programs ever developed--by American Airlines in the early 1980’s. In turn, airline-specific credit cards that allowed consumers to earn miles with everyday purchases were among the first cards to provide rewards.
 
The best airline cards provide a combination of strong introductory bonuses, generous miles or points rewards tied to the airline’s frequent flyer program, flexible points-redemption, and solid travel-related benefits. While certain airline cards score higher than others based on these factors, you’ll of course want to begin your selection process by airline. Start with the carriers you prefer, if any. Consider, too, any other airlines that extensively serve both your home city and your frequent or aspirational vacation destinations.
 The impact of the novel coronavirus pandemic on the global economy and travel may influence your perspective on whether it's the right time for you to apply for an airline credit card. Over the long term, we still expect these cards to deliver solid value and be worthy of consideration for someone who travels a lot and is comfortable booking the majority of their flights on a particular airline. 40,000 bonus miles after you spend $2,000 on purchases in the first 3 months your account is open. 
Based on our analysis, the United Explorer offers the highest value per mile earned of any airline credit card, and miles can be redeemed in multiple ways, including for flights with participating member airlines in its Star Alliance, one of the largest global airline partnerships. The compelling introductory bonus of the card really adds to the value of the card because of the high value placed on redeeming those points with United. The annual fee is in line with its competitors and is waived the first year. The card does not charge foreign-transaction fees which helps make it a good choice for international travel.
 Earn 50,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles after spending $2,500 in purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. 
We chose the Citi/AAdvantage Platinum Select World Elite Mastercard as the best airline credit card for American Airlines customers due to the combination of its reward structure and price point. We also chose it as the best airline card for gasoline purchases because of the bonus miles offered for those purchases. It offers an above average rewards earning rate on American Airlines and restaurants with a competitive earnings rate for all other spending. The card also offers a strong one-time bonus after reaching relatively light spend minimums and a reasonable annual fee that's waived in the first year.
 50,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Chase Sapphire Reserve isn't a co-branded airline card but it offers a ton of flexibility in terms of transferring its points to various airline programs which helps make it our pick for the best general airline card. It has a competitive one-time point bonus, annual travel credit and high rewards earning rate. While the annual fee is high, if you're an avid traveler the annual travel credit can help justify it and it has numerous other travel-related benefits that make this the best card for airlines if you're not ready to commit yourself to a single airline.
 60,000 bonus miles after you spend $3,000 on purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. 
We chose the United Business Card as the best airline card for small business because of its superior miles value, ability to earn bonus miles for United, restaurant, gas and office supply purchases as well as excellent travel benefits. As one of the world's largest air carriers, United Airlines along with its airline alliance partners provide extensive and flexible business travel options to small business owners and their employees, adding to the value of miles earned through the card.
 Earn 60,000 bonus miles and 5,000 Medallion Qualifications Miles (MQMs) after you spend $3,000 in purchases on your new card in your first 3 months. Offer expires 10/28/2020. 
The Delta Skymiles Platinum Amex card is our choice as the best option among Delta cards because of its robust miles earning structure with excellent bonus miles on Delta purchases, restaurant and, notably, U.S. supermarket purchases. Priority boarding and an annual companion certificate are also excellent benefits of the card. The annual fee is quite high relative to similar competitor cards but is easily justified for frequent Delta flyers, especially when considering the value the rewards structure and the one-time bonus.
 Earn 40,000 bonus points after you spend $1,000 on purchases in the first 3 months your account is open 
The Southwest Airlines Rapid Rewards Priority card is the top-of-the-line card allied with the airline, which typically scores very well in customer-satisfaction surveys. While the annual fee is on the high side for an airline credit card—its perks and credits should more than justify the fee for regular Southwest customers. Cardmembers get a 20% discount on in-flight purchases and are eligible to receive 4 upgraded boardings per year when available along with an additional 7,500 points upon the anniversary of account opening each year.
 
Airline credit cards are partnerships between major credit card issuers like Citi and Chase and air carriers like United Airlines, Delta, and American Airlines. Such cards are now offered by even the smallest of airlines, like Spirit and Allegiant Air. They allow you to earn miles or points on that airline on every dollar you spend—usually one mile or point per dollar spent—along with higher earnings when the card is used to purchase tickets or services on the airline. Cards may also offer better rates than the default of $1/I mile on select other purchases, such as those on hotels. Rewards can generally be redeemed for flights; seat upgrades to exit-row, business-class, or first-class seating; hotel stays; car rentals; or destination-based vacation packages offered through the airline. Some cards in the market offer flexible “miles” on purchases that can be redeemed for travel on any airline through the issuers’ dedicated booking portals.
 
As an additional incentive, airline credit cards usually provide valuable benefits when you fly, such as a waiver of checked baggage fees, upgraded boarding status, and a discount on in-flight purchases like drinks, food, and Wi-Fi. Certain ultra-exclusive airline cards even offer complementary airline lounge access, which some frequent fliers feel alone justifies these cards’ higher annual fees. 
 Enticing introductory one-time bonuses An additional way to earn miles or points without flying Flying benefits such as earlier boarding Discounts and fee waivers for certain services The best rewards redemptions are often limited to the airline itself Significantly higher interest rates than other categories of cards Annual fees are common, and sometimes substantial 
You should consider the following features when selecting an airline credit card:
 
Only choose an airline that makes sense for you, based on where you live and where you might be flying. Even if you live in a major city that’s likely serviced by many airlines, you should check the frequency and departure times for flights to your preferred destinations. If home is in a smaller city, you might have little choice but to select among a limited number of carriers that serve your area well. 
 
Since many, if not most, airline credit cards carry an annual fee, it’s wise to assess that cost against the benefits you expect to receive. That involves calculating, at least roughly, the value of the rewards you expect to earn, based on your anticipated spending and miles valuations such as those Investopedia publishes. Consider, too, the value to you of any other benefits or niceties the card offers, even if some—such as early boarding for flights—may be hard to quantify financially.
 
Most airline cards offer a one-time bonus in the form of frequent flyer miles or points. However, these almost invariably require you to meet an initial spending threshold, sometimes of several thousand dollars within the first three or four months the account is open. Before opting for a card, be sure your normal spending can satisfy the spending requirements of its bonus, since failing to pay off the required spend quickly and carrying it as an ongoing balance could quickly negate the bonus’s value. And consider strategically planning any major purchase in order that it helps you meet the necessary bonus spending.
 
Airline cards generally reward spending on the carrier, for tickets or extra services, with higher earnings than the card’s norm—typically 2 or 3 miles or points per dollar spent. Consider the size of this “multiplier” as you choose between cards. The same goes for the elevated rewards for purchases in select categories like dining, gas, or groceries, which some co-branded and general travel cards also provide.
 
Many airline credit cards offer valuable carrier benefits like fee waivers for checked bags, early boarding priority, and discounts on in-flight purchases. The cards may also offer travel perks not associated with the airline, including credits against the cost of TSA or Global Entry pre-check clearance and complimentary or discounted access to airport lounges.
 
Our scoring of the various airline cards depends in part on the respective values of their rewards—and those, in turn, should be an important factor as you choose among the cards. 
 
To arrive at those valuations, our research digs deep to compare the cost of buying flights to the number of miles required to acquire them through rewards. Where some other websites that cover cards take single snapshots of airfares, we research flight costs for a number of different fare classes, including economy, business, and first-class fares, and for both domestic and international destinations. Further, we look at fare data for a number of advance-booking scenarios, ranging from one to five months prior to departure. A few caveats to our valuations, though. Fuel surcharges are not included in our calculations, in part because some airlines charge these and some do not. Also, valuations are based on using rewards to buy further flights on the carrier; other redemption options may provide less value. Finally, despite diligent research, our valuations are only estimates; the precise value you’ll receive for each mile or point will vary by the transaction. 
 
Below, listed from most to least valuable, are our current valuations for each rewards mile or point offered by the major U.S. air carriers:
 
While you generally can’t transfer miles between frequent-flier programs, it is possible to book flights on other airlines who share membership in a global alliance. The biggest alliances (with their U.S. carriers in parentheses) are OneWorld (American Airlines), SkyTeam (Delta), and Star Alliance (United).
 
Within an airline alliance, then, you can earn miles in one airline’s frequent flier program and transfer and redeem those miles for flights on another. For example, miles earned on American Airlines can be transferred on a 1 to 1 basis and potentially redeemed for international travel on British Airways since they are both members of the One World Alliance.
 
Each airline’s frequent-flier program has its own rules and guidelines, but to maximize airline card rewards overall, follow these tips: 
 
The vast majority of airline credit cards charge an annual fee, but a few cards have no yearly charge. In addition to no-fee co-branded airline cards, there are flexible airline cards, not associated with any particular airline, that have no annual fee. The annual-fee cards generally offer better rewards and additional travel features compared with their no-annual-fee counterparts. If you fly regularly, then, it can be quite easy to justify the cost of the fee, whether through additional rewards or the value of perks such as waived checked-bag fees or credits for the cost of a streamlined security program.
 
If you only fly only occasionally, compare what you would earn with the no-annual-fee card that your airline offers with the rewards for no-annual-fee options in other non-airline card types. When shopping for no-annual-fee rewards cards, many people find better value in cash-back credit cards than branded airline cards. And those unaffiliated flexible airline cards customarily offer lower one-time bonuses (if they offer bonuses at all) and don’t provide enhanced earnings for airline purchases or airline-specific perks.
 
Airline credit cards make great sense for people who travel frequently for business or pleasure, have brand affinity to a certain major air carrier and want to leverage their travel and everyday spending to earn award flights on their preferred airline. Co-branded airline cards provide many benefits not offered by general travel credit cards, such as frequent flyer program status, priority boarding, free checked bags and discounts on in-flight food, beverages and services. Premium co-branded airline cards also come with added travel benefits like primary car rental insurance, Global Entry/TSA Pre-check fee reimbursement, airline lounge access and more. Conversely, if you don’t fly often or have no loyalty to any particular airline you may be better off with a general travel card or one that earns cash back rewards.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
