
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Owning a mobile home (also referred to as a “manufactured” home) has special considerations that are different from those involved with owning a traditional home, such as qualifying for an insurance policy. Luckily, there are separate mobile home insurance policies that offer protection against certain types of vulnerability, such as windstorms and water damage. 
 
To help you find the best coverage for your needs, we’ve selected five mobile home insurance companies as worthy of attention.
 
Founded in 1952 and with more than 38,000 agents representing the company, Foremost is part of the Farmers Insurance group. The insurer is one of the largest mobile insurance providers in the country, and we chose this as the best overall company due to its add-on coverages, willingness to provide policies for mobile homeowners despite credit issues, and types of discounts available.
 Offers good range of additional coverage, such as debris removal and food spoilage Willing to write policies for those who have had credit issues and older dwellings Endorsed by AARP and provides discounts to its members No online application available Not available in Hawaii and Washington, D.C. Reports of slow claims process 
Foremost offers comprehensive property cost coverage, personal liability, and property coverage, and extras such as food spoilage, additional living expenses, and locksmith coverage. Add-ons include earthquake coverage, water damage, identity fraud expense, and trip coverage when your home is being transported. 
 
Foremost also offers extended replacement coverage (not always offered from other insurers), so if your home is declared a total loss, you’ll be eligible for up to an additional 20% reimbursement above your policy limit’s value. Discounts you may be eligible for include a multiple policy discount, claims-free discount, high deductible discount (if you’re over 50 years old), protective devices discount, and new home buyer discount. 
 
Additional details:
 
Founded in 1937, Progressive is one of the largest insurance companies in the country. Progressive offers discounts geared specifically for new homeowners. In particular, it’s easy to get a quote online, and it offers perks such as its contractor connection network.
 Replacement cost coverage Discounts geared toward new homeowners Mobile app available Coverage varies by state Average consumer ratings Some policies underwritten by third-party companies 
Progressive’s standard coverage includes protection for your dwelling in case of fire, hailstorm, theft, vandalism, explosions, and other covered perils. It also includes actual cash value for personal property, loss of use coverage, and liability coverage. Homeowners can also add on trip collision coverage and replacement cost coverage, though these vary from state to state. 
 
One of Progressive’s attractive discounts is the ability to bundle your mobile home and auto policies and be responsible for only one deductible—your claim needs to apply to both, and the offer isn’t available in all states. Other discounts include ones for new homeowners, paying in full, opting to receive policy documents electronically, and installing safety devices. 
 
Additional Details:
 
Founded in 1931 and based in Northbrook, Ill., Allstate is one of the country’s largest insurance companies. We picked it as the best one for retirees because of its discounts specifically designed for this demographic and the ability to get face-to-face interaction with an Allstate agent.
 Discounts for original title holders and retirees Good optional coverage choices Mobile app available No immediate online quotes Customer experiences vary depending on local agent 
Allstate provides standard mobile home insurance much like other companies, such as actual cash and/or replacement cost coverage for your mobile home structure and personal property, guest medical protection, and liability protection. Optional coverages include protection against water backup, green improvement reimbursement, and electronic data recovery. Distinctive optional coverages include protection against satellite dish antennas and mine subsidence coverage. 
 
Allstate offers a whole slew of discounts, including for multiple policies, enrolling in autopay, being claims free, and new customers. Additional discounts include ones for original titleholders and those who are over 55 and retired.
 
Additional details:
 
Read the full review: Allstate Homeowners Insurance
 
Founded in 1920, American Family Insurance is also known as AmFam. This insurer is the best for discounts because it offers one of the largest amounts of discounts, including a special one—the generational discount.
 Large number of ways to quality for discounts Mobile app that can catalog your belongings Variety of additional coverage options Coverage in only 19 states Reports of slow claims processing 
American Family offers standard coverage damages from fire, theft, vandalism, and other covered perils, personal liability, loss of use, and medical payments if a guest is injured on your property. Policyholders have the option of adding optional coverages, such as ones for hidden water damage, matching siding endorsement, trip collision coverage, and property coverage for other structures. 
 
This insurer offers the usual discounts, such as ones for bundling policies, enrolling in autopay, installing safety devices (including ones for smart homes), being a loyal customer, and new homes. Policyholders who have parents who are also policyholders get a discount. American Family Insurance also offers diminishing deductible coverage, where you get a $100 credit automatically and your deductible will go lower each year you renew your policy. 
 
Additional details:
 
Founded in 1049, American Modern claims that it’s one of the first companies to specialize in mobile home insurance. We picked this as the best contender for specialized coverage due to the fact that it offers protection for older mobile homes and ones that are vacant or aren’t occupied full time. 
 Coverage for older mobile homes Coverage for vacant or seasonal mobile homes Highly rated mobile app Must contact agent for a quote Not available in Florida and New York Discounts not as generous as other insurers 
American Modern’s standard coverage is basic, offering protection against covered perils such as fire, wind, and lightning, with repairs based on actual cash value, though there is an option to upgrade to replacement cost. It also has medical coverage, personal property coverage, and actual cash value coverage for personal property. Optional coverage includes for seasonal and/or vacant mobile homes, protection against water backup, full repair cost loss settlement, and enhanced coverage for additional causes of loss.  
 
The insurer provides a few discounts, including the usual ones for bundling policies, paying in full, installing safety systems, and receiving paperless documents. However, coverage for vacant properties isn’t eligible for a discount, and other policies may only receive up to 10% off premiums.
 
Additional details:
 
Laws don’t require you to have mobile home insurance, but that doesn’t mean you don’t need to purchase a policy. Most home lenders require you to have a certain amount of coverage before you’re approved for a mortgage. In addition, you may need some type of mobile home insurance if you want to legally put your home in most mobile home parks. Also, you should consider having some form of mobile home insurance as a way to protect your property and belongings, especially if you can’t cover the cost of repairing or replacing your mobile home. 
 
Although a standard mobile home insurance policy can differ from state to state, it typically offers similar coverage types, including:
 
There may also be coverage specific to mobile homes, such as trip collision coverage to protect your home against repairs if it’s damaged while moving between locations. Other optional coverages include ones for hidden water damage, debris removal, and matching siding endorsement if only part of your mobile home’s wall is damaged. 
 
Many factors will affect your mobile home insurance rate. Underwriters take into account different considerations, such as your physical structure—its size, value and age—and whether the area you live in has certain risks, such as severe weather. Insurers will also determine the price based on the deductible, limits, and coverage options you choose. 
