
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
If you've got excellent credit, you’ve got plenty of loan options at your disposal. Though other factors can influence whether a lender will actually approve you, a stellar credit score and history at least proves to them that you’re someone who handles debt responsibly and pays bills on time. As a result, you’re seen as a less risky borrower—which means you’re more likely to qualify for the best terms and rates.
 
LightStream, the online lending arm of Truist bank, offers some of the lowest fixed rates around: as low as 3.99% and no higher than 19.99%—with automatic payments (it's 0.5% higher without). Minimum rates and your repayment duration do vary, depending on the purpose of the loan—LightStream is big on categorizing loans, offering financing for everything from autos to weddings. There are also no fees and borrowers may take out up to a maximum of $100,000. 
 Extremely low APRs (with autopay) Wide range of loans Guarantees to better competitors' rate (restrictions apply) Hard inquiries only (which can dampen credit score temporarily) Longer credit history required, usually several years Inability to change due date once repayments start 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: LightStream
 
Payoff advertises as a lender to help borrowers consolidate high-interest credit card debt. Their competitive rates, starting at 5.99% offers those looking for breathing room finally get some. Though the minimum requirements are a 640 credit score, it’s safe to assume the best rates will go to the most creditworthy individuals. Applicants can take out a loan starting from $5,000.
 No late payment fees or prepayment penalties Soft credit inquiry (so no affect on credit score) Offers transparency on loan approval requirements High minimum loan amount Charges an origination fee, up to 5% No joint applications 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Payoff
 
In addition to some of the lowest rates around and a high maximum loan limit, online lender SoFi offers benefits for its members, as it calls clients—and you become a member once you take out a loan. These benefits include no origination, prepayment, or late fees, plus access to credentialed financial advisors to offering personalized money advice.
 No fees or late or prepayment penalties Exclusive member benefits  Highly competitive APRs Slower funding times  Higher minimum loan amount  High income a factor in getting best rates  
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: SoFi
 
Discover Bank is the online banking arm of the credit card company, famed for its cashback rewards and 100% U.S.-based customer service. One of Discover's strong points is that its loans come in relatively small amounts, excellent if the minimums set by other lenders exceed the amount of financing you really need. Yet its interest rates are competitive (many lenders reserve the better rates for larger loans).
 Variety of loan terms offered, up to 84 months Direct payment of creditors on debt consolidation loans Soft credit inquiry (so no affect on credit score) Lower maximum loan amount (only $35,000) Restrictions on use of funds, particularly debt consolidation loans Late payment fee of $39 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Discover
 
Marcus by Goldman Sachs, the online banking arm of the brokerage firm, offers a comprehensive FAQ section that may be able to address all your questions before applying for a loan. The lender also offers remarkable transparency in the form of the fees it charges (which are none, by the way) along with various rewards borrowers may receive, such as for on-time payment.
 Borrowers have the ability to defer one payment after making 12 consecutive monthly payments on time in and in full No fees, including late and origination fees or prepayment penalties Direct payment of creditors on debt consolidation loans No joint applications Rates generally higher than competitors' Lower maximum loan amount (only $40,000) 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Marcus
 
Wells Fargo offers in-person service for those who are interested in a lender with brick and mortar locations. The bank has more than 5,400 locations to service your loan—new customers need to do so in person. Their credit requirements aren’t as strict as other lenders and rates start 5.99%.
 Receive loan processes as soon as the next business day Minimal fees Rate discount available for qualifying customers Hard inquiry conducted when checking rates No rate discounts or additional loans High minimum loan amount 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Wells Fargo
 
Alliant Credit Union offers loans up to five years, best for those who are interested in short-term loans. It also offers a hardship program, also called their Debt Protection program. If you were to sign up for this optional program, you can suspend your monthly payments without being charged extra interest or penalties if some unexpected or emergency event would prevent you from paying your bills.
 Most applicants will receive same day approval No origination fees and prepayment penalties Low minimum loan amount Rates are higher the longer the loan term Need to be a member to receive a personal loan Loan terms short compared to other lenders 
Other important information:
 
Known for its travel rewards credit cards, American Express is delving into the world of personal loans. The loan amounts offered make sense for those who are planning a wedding—an amount that’s not too high but not a few hundred dollars either. Though American Express is offering competitive rates, the downside is that you need to be an existing cardholder and have an offer to qualify.
 Competitive rates for the most creditworthy of borrowers No application or origination fees Fast funding time Need to be an existing American Express cardholder Need to be invited to apply for a personal loan Charges late fees 
Other important information:
 
When we're talking credit, we're mainly talking credit score—a statistical measure, not unlike an academic grade, that summarizes your creditworthiness in three digits. The credit scores most lenders use range between 300-850—which sounds a lot wider than it is, in terms of lender approval. Most credit scores fall between 600 and 750, according to Experian, one of the "Big Three" credit reporting bureaus. A score of 740 and above is considered “very good” and scores of 800 and above are considered “excellent.”﻿﻿
 
Understanding where you stand in terms of your credit score is important. It can mean the difference between a loan with an interest rate in the double digits (if you have a less-than-good score, under 660 or so) or one just a few percentage points above prime (if you are in the excellent-score category). Other benefits to having a higher credit score include the ability to borrow higher loan amounts and longer repayment terms.
 
According to Experian’s data from Q2 of 2019, the average rate for personal loans is 9.41%. Of course, it depends on the lender and what factors when determining the borrower's rate, which includes your financial history and credit score. 
 
Most likely, the higher your income and credit score, the more likely you’ll be approved for the lowest rates. There may also be other factors such as your debt to income ratio (DTI), which shows the percentage of debt you’re paying in comparison to your gross monthly income. Lenders look at this number to determine whether you can handle taking on more debt.
 
Some factors to look for include:
 
In addition, consider factors such as restrictions on how the loan must be used, minimum payment amounts, and how soon you’ll receive funds. 
