
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
We've spent thousands of hours analyzing credit cards in order to identify the best cards for individuals who currently have bad credit. This list represents our top rated cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we may receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Secured card is our choice for the best overall credit card for those with bad credit as well as the best option for cash back rewards. It charges no annual fee and even offers an introductory offer on balance transfers in case you're paying high interest on another credit card. While not low, the long term interest rate is more consumer-friendly than most cards aimed at the lower end of the credit score spectrum. Discover will also automatically review your account after 8 months of responsible use for possible upgrade to an unsecured card.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
We chose the Discover it Student Cash Back is our pick for the best card option for those students just starting out with credit and haven't had an opportunity to establish a credit history while in college because of its availability to those just beginning their credit journey and its affordability. With excellent acceptance, no annual fee and relatively low interest rates its a natural fit for the student market. Plus, in addition to helping build credit the Discover it Student Cash Back card allows students to earn 5% cash back in rotating categories each quarter and 1% cash back on all other. spending.
 
We chose the Capital One Platinum Mastercard as the best unsecured option for credit-impaired applicants because it has very low fees and reasonable interest relative to the competition. There is no rewards program but also charges no annual fee or foreign transaction fees. The Capital One Platinum is a solid option for building credit and, with consistently responsible use, can be a gateway to a broad array of reward card options from Capital One once credit scores improve.
 
Our choice for the best business card option for those with bad credit is the Wells Fargo Business Secured Credit Card because it occupies a fairly unique spot in the market - allowing small business owners to build both their personal and business credit. Business credit card issuers typically require good to excellent credit for application approval, so this card can be a great option for small business owners with impaired credit or no credit history. The card also offers the flexibility to earn reward points or cash back. Unlike consumer secured credit cards, credit lines can be allowed to go as high $25,000 - providing flexible working capital for small business owners.
 30,000 bonus miles after you spend $3,000 within the first 90 days 
The SKYPASS Visa Secured Card is our pick for the best credit card with travel rewards available to U.S. citizens as well as expat workers needing to build their credit while in this country. The SKYPASS Visa Secured card earns miles on Korean Air that can also be redeemed for travel through the SkyTeam Alliance over 20 airlines including domestic airline partners like Delta and international partners like Air France and KLM. The card charges a $50 annual fee but that can be justified by the 5,000 mile bonus after the first purchase, ongoing miles earning with usage and a 1,000 mile bonus when renewing card membership each year.
 
Bad credit is generally defined in terms of a person’s credit score. The most widely used credit score is the FICO score. FICO scores range between 300 and 850, and bad credit is broken into two groups. The first is poor credit, sometimes called “subprime,” which applies to scores between 500 and 600. Truly bad credit means a score below 500. The other type of credit score used by lenders is the VantageScore, which also follows a 300 to 850 scale but defines a bad credit score as anything below 550.
 
Bad credit, as indicated by a low credit score, can result from a number of factors:
 
As mentioned above, FICO credit scores range between 300 and 850. According to the credit reporting agency Experian, in 2019 about 16% of Americans had what FICO classifies as poor credit (a score under 580), while another 18% had fair or subprime credit (a score between 580 and 669).  
 
In a 2018 study, FICO 8 credit scores (the most widely used FICO score) across the U.S. broke down like this: 
 
Having bad credit means that you will have significantly less access to any type of credit — and any loans or credit cards you do qualify for will be much more expensive in terms of interest rates and fees. Other credit card features that are commonly offered to people with better credit, such as rewards and promotional APR offers, will likely not be available.
 
Credit scores also serve as a proxy for trustworthiness in our society and are sometimes used by employers, landlords, cell phone providers, and insurance companies to determine how much of a risk you represent. They may set their prices accordingly or decline to do business with you altogether.
 
Regardless of how bad your credit is, there is almost always a path to move things in a better direction. Building a positive credit history can take time, but it is certainly possible with responsible credit behavior and some patience. Simply avoiding the behaviors that cause bad credit can go a long way. But, it takes credit to build credit and the first order of business if you’re starting over is to get credit in your name and begin using it prudently.
 
If you already have credit accounts in your name, start by getting a copy of your credit report from each of the three major credit reporting agencies, Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. You’re entitled to at least one free report from them every year through the official website annualcreditreport.com. It’s vitally important to review these reports to determine if there is any incorrect information or evidence of fraudulent activity. Those mistakes can be corrected by contacting your lenders and card issuers, and the positive impact on your credit score could show up quickly.   
 
If you haven’t established credit yet, a credit card can be an excellent tool for doing that. If you are unable to obtain a regular credit card, a secured credit card could be your best option. Secured cards require you to deposit money in a bank account with the issuer, and typically limit your available credit to that amount. Once you’ve used a secured card responsibly for a period of time, the issuer may upgrade you to a regular card and return your security deposit.
 
Once you get a credit card, the best way to begin building a good credit score is to use the card, keep your credit utilization below 30%, and always pay your bill (in full, if possible) on or before the billing due date. It’s really a simple formula, but can be quite effective over time.
 
The only way to know for sure whether you have bad credit is to check your credit score. There are free sources for checking your score online that only require the last four digits of your Social Security number. Checking won’t affect your credit.  
 
Card issuers never promise to approve anyone’s application, regardless of their credit score. That said, issuers have designed card products for different segments of the market and that includes the subprime market for people with bad (or no) credit. As mentioned above, secured cards can be a good place to start if you have some cash to deposit with the card issuer. These cards typically report to all three major credit bureaus, which can help you build a solid credit history.
 
Another option, which doesn’t require a security deposit, is to apply for one or more store credit cards from national retailers like Sears, Target, Kohl’s, or Best Buy. These types of cards can only be used with those respective retailers — unlike cards issued by banks that carry the Visa or Mastercard logo or that are issued directly through Discover or American Express, which can be used anywhere that accepts those credit cards. Store credit cards should only be considered a stepping stone to build credit, however, as they tend to have very small credit lines and charge high interest rates.
 
While there are numerous unsecured Visa and Mastercard options targeting people with bad credit, they can be a needlessly expensive option. These types of cards tend to have limited credit lines, very high interest rates, and numerous fees. The Credit CARD Act of 2009 sought to reign in these abusive products (sometimes referred to as “fee harvester” cards) by outlawing any annual fee that exceeds 25% of the credit line. However, issuers have gotten around that by exploiting a loophole that allows them to charge “processing” fees that are as bad or worse than the previously predatory annual fees. So, buyer beware with these types of subprime cards. As mentioned, secured cards, from major issuers like Discover or Citi, can be a much less expensive option until your credit score rises above the 600 mark and better, unsecured options become available to you.
 
While credit cards designed for people with poor or bad credit generally don’t come with the same generous terms as those for lower-risk consumers, there are still some critical features to look for when reviewing options and choosing one to apply for.  
 
Unfortunately, few, if any, credit cards designed for people with bad credit allow balance transfers, especially at interest rates that would prove advantageous. If you find one that does, it might make sense to transfer your balance if your current card is charging penalty rates of 36%, for example, and you can move the funds to a card that charges a rate in the mid-20% range. While that rate would still be high, it could save you money in interest charges (not accounting for likely transfer fees of 5%), if the new issuer can provide a large enough credit line to absorb the transfer. Before you consider a balance transfer, however, it would be worth contacting your current card issuer to see if you can simply negotiate a lower rate.
 
Correcting errors on your credit report can pay off within a matter of months. Other credit behaviors, like paying your bills on time, can take longer to improve your score. What’s more, some aspects of your credit history, such as any bankruptcies or charge-offs, can take up to a decade to disappear from your report. According to Experian, the following actions can have an impact on credit scores in these general time frames.
 
Source: Experian Information Solutions
 
To arrive at our list of best credit cards for bad credit we filtered our list of nearly 300 credit cards for cards that consider applications from people with credit scores below 600. From this list we then objectively chose the best cards in each subcategory based on their star ratings and feature quality.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
