
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Credit cards that offer cash back, points, or miles on consumers’ grocery purchases are a popular category of rewards cards. We’ve analyzed all the cards in our extensive database to see how they stack up, based on average supermarket spending according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and a number of other important features. 
 Earn a $300 statement credit after you spend $3,000 in purchases on your new Card within the first 6 months. Offer Expires 12/10/2020. 
The Blue Cash Preferred Card from American Express is our top pick for best overall grocery and best cash back grocery rewards because of its exceptional 6% cash back at U.S. supermarkets on spending up to $6,000 per year, allowing cardmembers to earn up to $360 on grocery rewards alone. The card also offers strong bonus cash back at on gas and dining expenses, making a great primary card for expense categories that are typically the largest for most Americans. There is a $95 annual fee but most will find the cost to easily be worth it given the lucrative rewards structure.
 Earn 60,000 Membership Rewards(R) points after you spend $4,000 on eligible purchases with your new Card within the first 6 months. 
The American Express Gold Card is our top choice for grocery rewards points because of its 4 points per dollar on all U.S. supermarket purchases and U.S. restaurants up to $25,000 in combined spending. Given that the value of Membership Rewards points can be worth over 2 cents each based on how they are redeemed, the potential rate of return on grocery spending can be quite exceptional. There is an annual fee of $250, so this card makes better sense for someone who can take full advantage of its bonus rewards in groceries, gas, restaurant and travel spending.
 $125 Amazon.com Gift Card upon approval with an eligible Prime membership. 
The Amazon Business Prime American Express Card wins for best business grocery rewards, as grocery purchases through Whole Foods Market earn 5% cash back for eligible Prime Members on your first $120,000 in purchases each year. This card perk can be a great fit for many small business owners ranging from FBA sole proprietors to companies stocking up their work kitchens with snacks and beverages to fuel their employees. Amazon.com and Amazon Web Services charges also receive top bonus rewards along with 2% cash back at U.S. gas stations and restaurants and 1% on all other purchases.
 Get a $70 Amazon.com Gift Card instantly upon credit card approval. 
We chose the Amazon Prime Visa Signature as our top pick for grocery rewards at Whole Foods Market because of its large unlimited cash back bonuses with the WFM and other Amazon.com purchases. Based on government figures on average annual grocery spending we estimate a grocery earnings potential of over $220 in cash back from that category alone. There is no annual fee for eligible Amazon Prime members.
 Earn 5% back in Walmart stores for the first 12 months when you use your Capital One Walmart Rewards Card with Walmart Pay - the quick and secure way to pay with your phone at Walmart. 
The Capital One Walmart Rewards Mastercard is our top pick for earning cash back rewards on groceries from Walmart and Walmart.com. Walmart has become the nation's largest grocery chain after entering this category in the past decade by leveraging its massive national retail footprint and supply chain logistics and the Capital One Walmart Rewards Mastercard is the logical choice that can allow you to earn substantial cash back rewards on their groceries while taking advantage of their already discounted prices.
 
Most rewards cards provide cash back, points, or miles on grocery purchases, but some make grocery shopping more rewarding than others. Typically, those cards feature grocery purchases as a bonus earnings category and pay a higher rate of rewards on them. Such cards may or may not exclude big box stores like Walmart or wholesale clubs like Costco, BJ’s, or Sam’s Club from their bonus category. However, most big box stores and all the major wholesale clubs offer their own co-branded credit cards that pay consumers attractive rewards in exchange for their brand loyalty.
 
Fixed-rate rewards credit cards. As the name implies, the rewards earning rate on fixed-rate rewards cards is a set number of points or cash back on all purchases, typically 1.5% but some as high as 2%. That includes grocery purchases, which get no special treatment.
 
Tiered-rate rewards credit cards. These cards provide more points, miles, or cash back percentages on certain categories of spending and a base rate on all other purchases. Many such cards include groceries in their bonus categories. Some cards with tiered bonuses, like those offering 5% cash back on certain categories, rotate their categories, so groceries might be eligible for bonus earnings only for part of the year. 
 
Other cards with higher levels of rewards for grocery spending, usually offered through partnerships between grocery retailers and card issuers, provide those extra rewards year-round. Getting one of these cards can make sense if you do most of your shopping at a particular grocery chain or wholesale club and want to earn rewards you can use there.  
 Enhanced rewards on a major spending category Other spending categories often have bonus rewards, as well Most charge no annual fee Grocery spending eligibility may be capped Co-branded grocery credit cards typically limit rewards to purchases at their stores Interest rates can be higher than non-rewards cards 
To compare different cards, it’s helpful to examine your spending patterns and try to estimate how much you might get from each card in terms of rewards. While grocery shopping is a significant category for most people, other monthly spending categories can be equally or even more important. Also consider any sign-up bonuses a card might offer and whether it charges an annual fee.
 
In many cases, people with bad credit can qualify for a secured credit card that offers cash back or points on all purchases, including groceries. Secured credit cards, if used responsibly, can be a way to build a good credit score and eventually qualify for a regular, non-secured card with solid rewards on groceries and other major spending categories.
 
Investopedia pledges to provide exhaustive and objective information about all credit cards offered in the United States. Reviews and rankings are created by our editorial team independently and impartially, without regard to any financial relationships Investopedia may have with credit card issuers or their affiliates.
 
In order to track and assess the entire U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth.
 
Once all of a particular card’s features have received a score, we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for that card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as balance-transfer). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, for balance-transfer cards we apply significantly higher weight to such key category attributes as interest rates or fees than to travel-specific features such as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance, which might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as travel-rewards cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs, along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
