
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
In recent years, a number of rewards credit cards—from airline and general travel cards to ones that offer cash back—have begun singling out dining as a category eligible for bonus rewards. And, what better time to offer to pick up the tab than when you're out for dinner or drinks? It can make you look altruistic, while also giving you an opportunity to score bonus rewards from your card. 
 
Out-of-home dining expenses, whether incurred at a sit-down restaurant, fast-food drive-thru, food truck, or bar, represent a considerable portion of most Americans' monthly budget. While some of these costs have decreased during the coronavirus pandemic, food takeout and delivery spending has gone up significantly. Card issuers realize they can entice new customers with the prospect of earning bonus rewards on this significant spending category.
 Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One SavorOne Cash Rewards card is our choice as the best overall card with dining rewards and the best option with no annual fee because of its unlimited 3% bonus cash back on all dining purchases. This card can be a great option for those who want to maximize their earnings on restaurant spending without having to spend enough to justify paying a hefty annual fee. It is also an excellent option to pair with another rewards card that earns bonus rewards on other spending categories.
 $200 online cash rewards bonus after you make at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of account opening. 
The Bank of America Cash Rewards for Students card is our pick for best dining rewards card for students because it lets you choose restaurants as your top bonus category. Restaurant meals are a major spending category for many college students, and this card has the advantage of enhanced dining rewards. The card has no annual fee and offers a one-time bonus worth $200 once its initial spending requirements have been met.
 Earn 50,000 bonus points after spending $4,000 within 3 months of account opening. 
The Citi Prestige Card is our choice as the best card for dining rewards points because of its 5X points on restaurant purchases and the average value of its points—worth 1.22 cents each by our estimates—which provide a more than 6% return on this important category. There is a hefty $495 annual fee, but there's also a one-time bonus worth more than $600 once spending requirements are met and the ongoing points earning opportunities should justify the cost if used as a primary card.
 Earn 80,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. That's $1,000 when redeeming points for eligible purchases with the new Pay Yourself Back tool (currently, groceries, dining, home improvement and select charities), or for travel when you redeem through Chase Ultimate Rewards. 
We chose the Chase Sapphire Preferred card as the dining rewards card with the best bonus. It offers unlimited 2X points at restaurants globally, as well as for spending on travel, and it features the largest spending bonus—potentially valued at $1,000. Ultimate Rewards points with Sapphire Preferred have a value of 1.25 cents each when redeemed for travel through Chase or for statement credits against grocery, dining, home improvement and select charities donation spending through September 30, 2020 using Chase's Pay Yourself Back tool. Sapphire Preferred carries a reasonable $95 annual fee relative to its bonus value and ongoing rewards-earning opportunities.
 Earn 35,000 Membership Rewards® points after you spend $5,000 on eligible purchases with the Business Gold Card within the first 3 months of Card Membership. 
We chose the American Express Business Gold Card as the best dining rewards card for small-business owners. That's because of its 4X points per dollar on two select categories where businesses spend the most (up to $150K per year in combined spending), which could include restaurants. Given our average valuation of Membership Rewards points—1.2 cents each—those points can provide a nearly 5% return on business dining. There is a $295 annual fee but also a substantial initial spending bonus of 35,000 points after spending $5,000 in the first three months of account opening.
 
When you use your credit card, the card issuer recognizes restaurant purchases from the merchant code transmitted to it during the charge settlement process. That way the issuer can apply a bonus dining reward to the total purchase amount.  
 Compelling earnings on dining purchases Rewards usually apply to cost of alcoholic beverages purchased in bars and restaurants Often provide bonus rewards on other spending categories, too Eligible spending may be capped Interest rates can be higher than non-rewards cards 
Generally, you need good or excellent credit to qualify for credit cards that offer bonus rewards on dining. This goes for almost all rewards credit cards, regardless of bonus categories, as card issuers can only afford to offer top-line rewards to customers who have a very low risk of paying late or defaulting on any balances they owe. However, some secured credit cards make an exception, as described in the next section.
 
While dining rewards cards typically require strong credit, there are several cards available for those with bad credit or no credit. These cards are secured—meaning they require that the cardholder make a security deposit with the issuer, which protects the issuer if the cardholder defaults on the debt. A few secured card issuers offer cash back or points on dining purchases, which can help cardholders justify any annual fees they have to pay and also save a bit on the cost of dining out.
 
In order to track and assess the entire U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth.
 
Once all of a particular card’s features have received a score, we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for that card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as balance-transfer). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, for balance-transfer cards we apply significantly higher weight to such key category attributes as interest rates or fees than to travel-specific features such as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance, which might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as travel-rewards cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs, along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
