
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
When you have cash you want to save for a bit, but want to earn more than you would with a standard savings account, certificates of deposit can be a good option. To help you earn the most you can, here are our rankings on the best-paying CDs that are available to U.S. customers everywhere.
 
Drawn from our continuous research on the approximately 200 banks and credit unions that offer CDs nationwide, these certificates typically pay three to six times as much as the national average — or even more. To be eligible for our rankings, each CD must have a minimum deposit requirement of $25,000 or less and be offered by an FDIC-insured bank or NCUA-insured credit union.
 
In cases where more than one institution offers the same top rate, we've prioritized CDs by the shortest term, then the CD requiring a smaller minimum deposit, and if still a tie, by which CD has a milder penalty for early withdrawal.
 
Details on the early withdrawal penalty for the top CD in each term are provided below, along with information on how to join the credit union, where applicable.
 
If you aren't looking to lock your money up for a period of time and want easier access to it, you could look at opening a high-yield savings account as an alternative. Below are some savings account options from our partners which can be competitive with the rates you can earn on CDs. It should be noted that unlike a CD, where your rate is locked in, with a savings account the bank or credit union can change your rate at any time.
 
While the national average is a good indicator of the direction of rates—and how much they've changed over a period of time—they are not what you should consider when shopping for CDs. Instead, look for the top nationally available rates, which stand far above industry averages.
 
Take one-year CDs, for instance. The current national average is just 0.18% annual percentage yield (APY). Today's top-paying institution, however, will pay you 1.05% APY on that same one-year commitment—that's five times as much. Similarly, for three-year CDs, you can currently earn 1.30% APY instead of the industry average of 0.29% APY.﻿﻿
 
If you have cash you can park for a period of time, but want to earn more than the best savings and money market accounts will net you, our research on the best nationally available rates in every major CD term can lead you to maximum returns.
 
Keep in mind that CD yields are still considered taxable as interest income on both the state and federal levels, which will impact the total return you can realize.
 
Opening a CD is very similar to opening any standard bank deposit account. The difference is what you're agreeing to when you sign on the dotted line (even if that signature is now digital). After you've shopped around and identified which CD(s) you'll open, completing the process will lock you into a four things.
 
Once your CD is established and funded, the bank or credit union will administer it like most other deposit accounts, with either monthly or quarterly statement periods, paper or electronic statements, and usually monthly or quarterly interest payments deposited to your CD balance, where the interest will compound. 
 Offers a higher rate than you can earn with a savings or money market account Pays a guaranteed, predictable rate of return, avoiding the volatility and losses that are possible with stocks and bonds Is federally insured if opened with an FDIC bank or NCUA credit union Can help fend off spending temptations since withdrawing the funds early triggers a penalty Cannot be liquidated before maturity without incurring an early withdrawal penalty Typically earns less than stocks and bonds can over time Earns a fixed rate of return regardless of whether interest rates rise during the term 
Smart CD investors have a specific tactic for hedging against rate changes over time and maximizing their return. It's called a CD ladder and it enables you to access the higher rates offered by 5-year CD terms, but with the twist that a portion of your money becomes available every year, rather than every 5 years. Here's how to do it.
 
At the outset, you take the amount of money you want to invest in CDs and divide it by five. You then put one-fifth of the funds into a top-earning 1-year CD, another fifth into a top 2-year CD, another into a 3-year CD, and so forth through a 5-year CD. Let’s say you have $25,000 available. That would give you five CDs of varying length, each with a value of $5,000. 
 
Then, when the first CD matures in a year, you take the resulting funds and open a top-rate 5-year CD. A year later, your initial 2-year CD will mature, and you'll invest those funds into another 5-year CD. You continue doing this every year with whichever CD is maturing, until you end up with a portfolio of five CDs all earning 5-year APYs, but with one of them maturing every 12 months, keeping your money a bit more accessible than if all of it were locked up for a full five years.
 
What makes CDs attractive as an investment vehicle is not their rate of return but their risk-free nature. When you open a CD, you know upfront exactly what interest rate you will earn and for how long. Except for some speciality CDs, the rate on your certificate is guaranteed and locked for the full duration of the certificate, meaning your return is predictable and safe.
 
Adding to their risk-free nature is the fact that CDs, like other bank and credit union deposit products, are federally insured against bank failures. Depending on the financial institution offering them, CDs are insured by either the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA).
 
CD minimums can run as low as $250 or $500, and you'll find plenty of options with minimums up to $1,000. As for durations, the majority of CDs carry terms of six months to five years, though shorter and longer certificates exist at some banks. Larger deposits and longer terms typically earn higher interest rates, though promotional certificates often break that general rule. The interest rates available on the best-paying CDs are usually in line with the current inflation rate, so virtually any rate higher than that is a good deal. Often, online banks and credit unions offer the best CD rates.
