
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Hotel credit cards are designed for those who frequently stay in hotels for business or travel and wish to earn loyalty status and award nights with their spending. This list represents our top rated hotel cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 The impact of the novel coronavirus pandemic on the global economy and travel may influence your perspective on whether it's the right time for you to apply for a hotel credit card. Over the long term, we still expect these cards to deliver solid value and be worthy of consideration for someone who travels a lot and is comfortable spending the majority of their hotel stays at a particular chain. Earn 25,000 Bonus Points after you spend $3,000 on purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. Plus, earn an additional 25,000 Bonus Points after you spend $6,000 total on purchases within the first 6 months of account opening. 
The World of Hyatt Credit Card is our best overall hotel card and best for points value primarily because it offers the highest redemption value of any hotel points we analyzed and has a relatively low annual fee (though it still has one). While Hyatt hotel points are consistently the most valuable in the hotel rewards space, they tend to be harder to accumulate than those of many chains. To add to that it also offers great value through its competitive one-time bonus, a night at a category 1-4 Hyatt hotel on each cardmember anniversary, and a high earning rate on spend at Hyatt hotels. These benefits could quickly justify the card’s annual fee.
 Earn 5 Free Nights after you spend $5,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Marriott Bonvoy Boundless credit card is our choice for the best Marriott card because of its strong bonus rewards at Marriott properties and double points on all other purchases. The introductory bonus is currently 5 free nights after spending $5,000 in the first three months from account opening, which is quite exceptional. The annual fee is quite modest relative to its sibling the Bonvoy Brilliant American Express and can easily be justified with everyday spending and occasional hotel stays. Marriott has one of the largest hotel footprints in the U.S. and abroad, making its points more flexible in terms of redemption opportunities.
 Earn 100,000 Marriott Bonvoy points after you use your new Card to make $5,000 in purchases within your first 3 months of Card Membership. Earn up to $150 in statement credits within your first 6 months of Card Membership for all eligible purchases on your Card on U.S. Advertising in select Media. Plus receive complimentary Marriott Bonvoy Platinum Elite status for one year (February 1, 2021-January 31, 2022). Offer ends 1/13/21. 
We chose the Marriott Bonvoy Business American Express as the best business hotel rewards card because of its strong points value and generous bonus points earning structure for Marriott purchases as well those at U.S. restaurants and U.S. gas stations. Small business owners can leverage business travel and commuting spending along with dining purchases to quickly earn award nights at Marriott-branded properties. Marriott's hotel portfolio includes over 7,000 properties in 131 countries, making it a flexible hotel option for business travel.
 50,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Chase Sapphire Reserve isn't a co-branded hotel card but it offers a ton of flexibility in terms of transferring its points to various hotel programs which helps make it our pick for the best general hotel card. It has a competitive one-time point bonus, annual travel credit and high rewards earning rate. While the annual fee is high, if you're an avid traveler the annual travel credit can help justify it and it has numerous other travel-related benefits that make this the best card for hotels if you're not ready to commit yourself to a single hotel brand.
 Earn 130,000 Hilton Honors Bonus Points with the Hilton Honors American Express Surpass(R) Card after you use your new Card to make $2,000 in eligible purchases within the first 3 months of Card Membership. 
The Hilton Honors American Express Surpass Card is our pick for the best card for Hilton, among several team-ups between the Hilton hotel chain and American Express because of its valuable one-time bonus and excellent ongoing rewards for those who frequent Hilton properties. It also offers strong bonus earnings on U.S. restaurant and U.S. gas station purchases. The $95 annual fee can easily be justified with normal bonus category and everyday spending throughout the year.
 Earn 140,000 bonus points after spending $3,000 on purchases within the first three months of account opening. 
The IHG Rewards Club Premier Credit Card is our pick for the best for IHG because it provides the potential to earn significant rewards points at IHG properties—on top of its generous one-time bonus of 125,000 points, after making an initial spending requirement. The card’s other benefits include an anniversary night’s stay, automatic Platinum Status for IHG Rewards Club members, and Global Entry or TSA PreCheck reimbursement. With all of the ways to earn points, IHG loyalists should fairly easily be able to justify the annual fee.
 
Hotel credit cards are general-use cards that allow consumers to earn points with specific brands of hotels that have partnered with credit-card issuers. Points rewards are typically highest for hotel-related spending; after that, you typically earn one point- per-dollar-spent on all other purchases, which is the norm for this type of rewards card. 
 
Points earned with co-branded hotel cards can then be used to book award nights with the hotel chain. The points cost per night usually varies by the property and displayed on the location’s reservation website. Many hotel credit cards offer one-time introductory points bonuses provided you spend a designated amount within a certain time, which is often three months. The bonuses can easily be worth several nights in stays, depending on the level of hotel property you choose. Some cards also come with recurring annual bonuses of a hotel night, typically on your annual anniversary with the card. Annual fees are common with this type of card, but can generally be justified by the value of the benefits you receive. Aside from bonuses and rewards on spending, these can include elite status that earns you higher spending rewards and other perks such as complimentary room upgrades.  
 
Most hotel credit cards are issued as co-branded partnerships between a major hotel brand, such as Hyatt, Marriott or IHG, and a large national card issuer, such as Chase, Citi or American Express.   
 
Since some general travel cards offer extra rewards for hotel purchases, we also analyzed those in that category that earned points that can be redeemed for hotel stays. However, none of them made the cut among our top choices, since all proved less desirable overall than the best co-branded hotel cards.
 
Hotel credit cards aim to incentivize and reward hotel stays by offering notably high rewards for hotel brand-specific hotel purchases. Consumers who value hotel stays over other options for using rewards often find these cards a particularly good fit. The value of every point you earn with a hotel card tends to be lower than, say, the typical mile earned with a co-branded airline card. But the points you receive for every dollar spent tends to be correspondingly generous—as high as 12 points per dollar earned. That can make the actual value of rewards earned between the two card types comparable on a dollar-to-dollar basis..Or it can, at least, with most generous hotel loyalty programs. An Investopedia analysis of the value of points across hotel brands reveals a range of more than five times, from Hilton at a meager 0.43 cents per point to Hyatt at the top of the range at 2.22 cents. When scoring hotel cards, we take into account both the value of points and how easily they can be earned. 
 
Points from hotel credit cards generally have the most value when redeemed for stays with the associated hotel brand. Some hotel chains allow you to transfer points to the loyalty programs of other hotel or airline partners, but the transfer ratio is generally so low that this is rarely a lucrative option.
 Rewards for loyalty to hotel brand One-time introductory bonuses can alone earn you award nights Some cards automatically confer Elite Status in loyalty program Additional benefits like room upgrades Annual fees are the norm Relatively low points value for many hotel cards APRs are typically higher than with cash-back and non-rewards cards Only hotel purchases tend to be earn additional points per dollar spent 
If you travel often for business or leisure, hotel stays are inevitable. A hotel card presents an opportunity to focus your spending on a national chain and turn it into award nights and other benefits.
 
With so many chains having an international presence, a hotel rewards card offers an ideal opportunity to earn points on domestic (and international) business travel that you can use to reduce the cost of a personal trip abroad.
 
If you have an affinity for a certain hotel brand, this card type can allow you to achieve instant recognition and consideration. Many hotel credit cards confer automatic elite-member status, which otherwise could take years to achieve.
 
Those who relish the strategic challenge of earning the maximum return on card rewards will find satisfaction with a hotel card. All rewards programs are based on points, the required points vary by property, and special offers are frequent--all of which can keep rewards aficionados fully engaged in the work of making the most of their hotel spending.
 
Since co-branded hotel credit cards carry annual fees there are better options for those who are allergic to fees.
 
Hotel credit cards tend to have higher APRs, and don’t offer balance transfer opportunities so this type of card is not a good fit for those who carry a balance each month or several times a year.
 
Hotel cards typically require good-to-excellent credit, and so make little sense for those with less than stellar credit history and scores.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
