
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The best Wells Fargo credit cards provide competitive cash back, points, and/or consumer-friendly terms like no annual fees (or annual fees that are easily justified based on rewards), introductory interest rates, and one-time bonuses. Wells Fargo has cards for multiple market segments, offering rewards for consumers, students, and small-business owners interested in various types of reward earning and redemption methods. We reviewed Wells Fargo's most popular consumer and business credit cards and chose the ones below as the best in various categories, depending on your needs.
 Earn 20,000 bonus points when you spend $1,000 in purchases in the first 3 months ($200 cash redemption value). 
The Wells Fargo Propel American Express took top honors for best overall and best travel option from Wells Fargo due to its generous triple points earning structure on travel, gas, and dining purchases coupled with a base rate of 1 point on all other purchases. This card also has no annual fee, so it can serve as a good companion card to another rewards card with higher earnings on base spending or simply function as an excellent all-around primary card.
 Get $150 cash rewards bonus when you spend $500 in purchases in the first 3 months. 
We chose the Wells Fargo Cash Wise as the best cash-back option from Wells Fargo because of its solid 1.5% cash back on all spending. That, coupled with no annual fee, makes this a perfect card for those who just want a simple rewards structure without special spending categories to keep track of or the need to earn enough rewards to justify an annual fee.
 Get a one-time $500 cash back bonus or 50,000 bonus points when you enroll in the Business Card Rewards Program and spend $5,000 in the first three months of account opening. 
We chose the Wells Fargo Business Platinum Credit Card as the best business card from Wells Fargo because it shares the simple cash-back and no-annual-fee structure with the consumer Cash Wise card, making it a good option for business owners who appreciate straightforward value and lack of complication. Unlike Cash Wise, though, Business Platinum provides the choice of cash back or points. A substantial one-time cash-back or points bonus is also a nice opportunity after you meet the card's initial spending requirements.
 
The Wells Fargo Platinum Visa is our winner for the best balance-transfer card from Wells Fargo because of its introductory offer of 0% APR for 18 months on transfers made within 60 days of account opening. Balance-transfer offers are becoming less common during the coronavirus pandemic, and ones with such generous terms are rarer still. There is a 3% transfer fee, but that can likely be justified given the potential savings in interest during the introductory period.
 
The Wells Fargo Cash Back College Student card is Investopedia's pick for best student card from Wells Fargo because of its lucrative bonus cash-back earnings structure on popular spending categories during the first six months. The lack of an annual fee can make this a good card to start out with in college before upgrading to an even better Wells Fargo rewards card after graduation.
 
Wells Fargo is one of the oldest banking organizations in the U.S., formed in 1852 as an express and banking company in California by the same founders as American Express—Henry Wells and William Fargo—to take advantage of the booming gold rush that began in 1848. Through multiple mergers and acquisitions over the years that included Crocker National Bank, Norwest, and Wachovia, Wells Faro is now a super bank with coast-to-coast operations and more than $1.4 trillion in assets. Its credit card operations rank eighth in the U.S., just behind Discover in terms of outstanding balances.
 
Wells Fargo primarily issues Visa cards, along with an American Express card option for its Propel card and a Mastercard option for its business secured card. It doesn't issue any cards on the Discover network. Wells Fargo's cards include points and cash-back rewards and secured card options for consumers and small businesses, along with a card for college students.
 
Wells Fargo requires excellent or good credit for the majority of its consumer and business cards, although it does consider those with no credit history for its student card options and those with lower credit scores for its non-rewards and secured card options.
 
Wells Fargo rewards points are earned at various levels based on the particular card. Cash back is earned as a percentage back on purchases, both on a flat cash-back basis and with enhanced earnings for certain purchase categories during introductory periods with its college student rewards card.
 
Wells Fargo received a score of 783 out of 1,000 points in the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study, placing it in the bottom tier of major national credit card issuers. The average score among major issuers was 806. Some of Wells Fargo's satisfaction rating may be a negative perception holdover from its retail banking scandal, when the bank had to make restitution for opening millions of accounts on behalf of customers without their consent. The banking giant is under new management, so time will tell if its customer service ratings improve.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations so that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale, using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth. 
 
Once all of a card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for the card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, with travel rewards cards we apply significantly more weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
