
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
We've spent thousands of hours analyzing rewards credit cards in order to identify the best cards for a range of needs and objectives. A rewards credit card allows you to leverage your spending to earn a range of rewards currencies such as cash back, points, miles, or merchandise and gift cards. This list represents our top rated rewards cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 With the impact of the novel coronavirus pandemic on the global economy and travel, we expect that consumers may find themselves leaning more towards cash back cards than travel rewards. However, we've elected to keep a travel card at the top of our list because in the long term it could still provide the most rewards value. 50,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Chase Sapphire Reserve is our best overall rewards credit card and best for travel because of its competitive one-time point bonus, annual travel credit, high rewards earning rate, the fact that points are worth 50% more if you redeem them for travel through the Chase Ultimate Rewards portal, and the ability to transfer points on a 1:1 basis to eligible hotel and airline partners. While the annual fee is high, if you're an avid traveler the annual travel credit can help justify it and it has numerous other travel-related benefits that make this the best card for travel if you're not ready to commit yourself to a single airline or hotel. In the short term if you didn't want to save your points for travel, you could use them towards a statement credit.
 40,000 bonus miles after you spend $2,000 on purchases in the first 3 months your account is open. 
Based on our analysis, the United Explorer offers the highest value per mile earned of any airline credit card, and miles can be redeemed in multiple ways, including for flights with participating member airlines in its Star Alliance, one of the largest global airline partnerships. As with our best hotel card, you'd need to be committed to United as the airline you'll primarily fly with in order to extract the maximum benefit from the card. The compelling introductory bonus of the card really adds to the value of the card because of the high value placed on redeeming those points with United. The $95 annual fee is in line with its competitors and is waived the first year. The card does not charge foreign-transaction fees which helps make it a good choice for international travel.
 Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One Quicksilver Credit Card is our best for cash back and no-annual-fee because of its combination of waived fees, low interest and high rewards earning rate on all spending. With no annual fee you don't need to worry about making sure you're extracting maximum value from the card every year to make it worth it. The absence of a foreign-transaction fee makes this a rare cash-back credit card that’s worth bringing on a trip abroad once travel is no longer a public health concern and helps to make a compelling case that if you're only going to carry one rewards card that this should be it.
 Earn 20,000 bonus points when you spend $1,000 in purchases in the first 3 months ($200 cash redemption value). 
The Wells Fargo Propel is our pick for best bonus points because it offers 3X bonus points across more popular spending categories than other cards on our list, even ones with high annual fees. With a strong bonus offer, no annual fee and competitive intro purchase and balance transfer offers it's a solid all-around rewards card. As an added bonus it offers cell phone protection which is a unique feature for a card with no annual fee.
 Earn 80,000 Hilton Honors Bonus Points with the Hilton Honors American Express Card after you use your new Card to make $1,000 in eligible purchases within the first 3 months of Card Membership. 
The Hilton Honors American Express is our choice for best rewards card for hotels because of the value of Hilton rewards points and the ability to earn substantial 7 points per dollar for Hilton stays and 5 points per dollar on popular spending categories like restaurants, gas and groceries. Hilton also offers one of the largest hotel chain footprints, making it a practical choice for those seeking to earn and redeem points for future hotel stays.
 Earn 50,000 miles when you spend $4,500 in the first 3 months of account opening. 
The Capital One Spark Miles for Business card is our choice for best business rewards credit card because of its generous 2X miles on every purchase, regardless of spending category. And, with no annual fee the first year its's an easy card to test drive for even the smallest of business entities. By leveraging business expenses this card should easily allow business owners to fund future business or personal travel without having to add to operational expenses.
 
Rewards credit cards provide cash back, points, or miles for each dollar of spending. There’s typically a base rate that applies to all purchases, sometimes supplemented by higher bonus rewards for certain spending categories. Rewards are customarily redeemed for travel expenses, cash back, gift cards or merchandise through the credit card issuer’s online rewards portal. Total earned rewards can be viewed on your credit card billing statement or on the card issuer’s website when you log into your account. Rewards credit card programs vary widely. Overall, though, they share these positive and negative aspects:
 Introductory one-time bonuses Opportunities to earn bonus rewards Flexible redemption options Cash-back in the most rewarding categories may be capped Effort and expertise required to maximize the value of points/miles Redemption values vary significantly The most lucrative cards have annual fees 
A rewards card that provides points or miles can be lucrative, often more so than the other major variety of rewards card - those that provide rewards as plain cash-back.
 
That said, a rewards credit card isn’t for everyone. As noted, carrying one requires grasping a rewards structure more complex than simply receiving a percentage of your spending back. In addition, more so than even with cash-back cards, the best points cards have annual fees. For example, several of our rewards-card picks above carry a fee, at least after the initial year. If you don’t spend a lot each month on credit cards, it’s advisable to avoid getting one that carries an annual fee, because of the likelihood that you won’t be able to justify the cost through earned rewards.However, points cards needn’t be the only type you carry in your wallet. For many people, pairing a rewards points or miles credit card with one that provides cash back facilitates maximizing rewards on all their spending. Where a single card may have gaps in rewards coverage, carrying multiple cards of varying types increases the opportunities to cover all spending categories with lucrative rewards. Some issuers even provide incentives to do this by letting you pool or transfer rewards points from different cards, and allowing cash back to be converted to points or miles and transferred into their rewards program.
 
Knowing a points card will meet your needs, you now face the task to select one that best meets them. Here are some questions to help you navigate the selection process:
 
Since rewards among points cards vary by category, it’s important to know as precisely as possible the amounts you typically spend in which categories every month. Budgeting/tracking tools such as Mint can help with this task, since they automatically assign expenses to such spending categories as groceries, dining, and gasoline.
 
Armed with your spending record, you’re ready to assess how much you might earn each month or year on the cards you’re considering. That requires running the math.
 
For example, let’s say you spend $2,000 a month, and of that $500 is for groceries, $200 for dining, and $100 for gasoline. Let’s further say you’re comparing a fixed-rate card that pays 1 points per dollar on all spending with one that offers 3 points on restaurants, 2 points on groceries and gasoline purchases, and 1 point on all other purchases. In both cases, the points are worth one cent each.Under this scenario, the fixed-rate card would earn you $240 a year (based on $2,000 in monthly spending x 1 point per dollar x 1 cent per point = $20 each month x 12 months = $240.) The variable-rewards card would earn $360 (based on $600 a month for groceries and gasoline x 2 points per dollar spent x 1 cent per point = $12 each month x 12 months = $144. Plus $200 a month on dining x 3 points per dollar spent x 1 cent per point = $6 a month x 12 = $72 a year. Finally, there’s $1,200 a month on miscellaneous spending x 1 point per dollar spent x 1 cent per point = $12 each month x 12 months = $144.) As you can see, in this comparison the card that offered variable rates yielded rewards worth 50% more.
 
If a card with tiered or rotating rewards emerges as a strong contender for you, you now need to consider the extra attention they demand—and the effort you’re prepared to exert for additional rewards. You might decide that keeping track of tiered rewards is worthwhile, if there are only two tiers on the card. But cards with multiple tiers, or rotating rewards for which you must register, may be more work than their higher rewards justify.
 
While many rewards cards have no annual fee, don’t necessarily rule out those that do carry one. For-fee cards generally offer the highest earnings. If the earnings rate of a rewards card with an annual fee looks enticing, simply calculate the yearly earnings, using your predicted spending, and then subtract the cost of the fee from the total. Then compare how the earnings figure (less the fee) stacks up against other cards that don’t charge an annual fee.
 
Earning the most in rewards on a card entails taking advantage of all tiered or bonus spending categories, preferably up to the quarterly or annual cash-back maximum, if those are capped. It also requires planning spending so as to earn any one-time introductory bonus, if offered.
 Don’t overspend, and so carry a balance, in order to reach the spending requirement for a one-time bonus, or otherwise simply to earn rewards. Unless you’re currently benefiting from a 0% APR offer, the interest you will pay on outstanding balances almost always offsets, and more, any rewards earnings. 
Since APRs for rewards cards tend to be on the high side, balance carriers are best advised to find a card with lower interest on which to carry over purchases—which usually means favoring non-rewards cards.
 
Also, consider taking advantage of shopping rewards apps that have their own rewards. Using one of those can allow you to double dip and amplify your rewards when shopping online. Even if you’re earning only one point per dollar on your card, the app allows you to get an extra value beyond that for the same spending. Also, it’s important to “point” out that if you anticipate carrying a balance on your points rewards credit card it can be suboptimal in terms of the overall rewards earnings, as interest paid on outstanding balances almost always negates any rewards earnings, if not more.
 
Credit card rewards are generally simple on the earnings side with cash-back, points or miles but can be more complicated in terms of redemption and the related points or miles values involved. Cash back is much more straightforward in terms of value. Below are some common redemption methods:
 
Luckily, the current IRS rules do not currently consider credit card rewards as taxable and the value of which do not need to be claimed on tax forms each April 15th. It’s likely this is because the rewards are earned by spending after-tax dollars on credit cards and are offered as an incentive by the card issuer. However, it is possible that the IRS may change their mind at some point in the future and begin taxing the value of rewards.
 
Rewards earned from rewards credit cards - whether in the form of cash back, miles or points, can be well worth the effort - with one big caveat. They really only make sense for consumers who pay their balance in full each month. That’s because the interest charges incurred when carrying a balance more than wipe out any benefit from any rewards that might be earned from incremental purchases. But, for those that do pay their balance in full each month, rewards are a way of leveraging their everyday spending to earn something back with every purchase to put toward travel, merchandise, gift card, or as a statement credit against their balance.
 
Another consideration in determining if a rewards card is worth it concerns the presence and amount of an annual fee. Many rewards cards come with no annual fee but for those that do it can be important to consider the value of any rewards that might be earned over the course of the year in order to determine if the fee is justified or not. For those that spend a lot on credit cards the rewards can be considerable. For low spenders the rewards can still be worth it but a no-annual-fee rewards card is probably a better fit.
 
For this list of the best rewards credit cards, we considered a range of card types, from cash-back cards to those affiliated with airlines and hotels to general travel cards in which the carrier issues their own points.
 
As part of our ongoing rating process we will re-score and publish updates of this list every month going forward.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources.
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice.
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards).
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands.
