
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Citi is one of the largest credit card issuers in the United States in terms of cards in circulation and outstanding balances. It was also among the first issuers of rewards credit cards, having launched the American Airlines AAdvantage card in the 1980s and the Shell Mastercard in the early 1990s. Today Citi offers a wide array of cards, including balance transfer, rewards, student, and secured credit cards. To save our readers time, we’ve done extensive research to single out the best Citi credit cards based on the needs of individual consumers and small-business owners.
 
The Citi Double Cash Rewards card is our choice for best overall Citi card as well as Citi's best cash back card. Double Cash is the gold standard for cash back rewards, with 1% back on purchases followed by another 1% when you pay your bill. There is no one-time bonus, but the lack of an annual fee and the card's ongoing rewards structure on all purchases make it a winner.
 Earn 50,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles after spending $2,500 in purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. 
We chose the Citi / AAdvantage Platinum Select World Elite Mastercard as Citi's best airline credit card because of its one-time bonus, enhanced earnings opportunities on American Airlines, global dining, and gasoline purchases as well as its exceptional per-mile value, which Investopedia estimates to be worth 2.32 cents.
 
Citi Simplicity is our pick for the best Citi balance-transfer card because of its 0% APR on transfers and new purchases that extends for 18 months from the date of account opening. Many issuers have eliminated balance transfers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, but Citi has kept this customer-friendly card open for business. There is a 3% balance-transfer fee, but that can be justified if you're moving a significant balance from a high-interest card.
 Earn 65,000 American Airlines AAdvantage® bonus miles after spending $4,000 in purchases within the first 4 months of account opening. 
The CitiBusiness / AAdvantage Platinum Select Mastercard is Investopedia's choice for best Citi business card due to its substantial bonus and travel benefits like priority boarding, free first checked bag for up to four travel companions, and no foreign transaction fees. Travel-related earnings opportunities are also impressive, with 2X miles on American Airlines, gasoline, and car rentals.
 
The Citi Secured Mastercard is our pick as the best Citi card for those with little or no credit history. It provides access to a credit line with a deposit as low as $200 and credit-building potential with responsible use. There are many secured cards on the market, but it can be advantageous to begin your credit journey with a major issuer like Citi that can provide a wide array of non-secured options once you've established a solid credit history. The Citi Secured Mastercard also has no annual fee.
 
Citi credit cards are issued by Citibank, which itself is part of the global financial services giant Citigroup. Citi began issuing credit cards in the 1960s in New York City but greatly expanded its reach in the early 1980s when it took advantage of South Dakota's repeal of usury laws that had restricted the amount of interest banks could charge customers. The new law also allowed banks headquartered in that state to charge higher interest to residents of other states, a move that was upheld in a landmark Supreme Court ruling. As a result, Citi moved its credit card operations from New York to South Dakota and grew rapidly by leveraging the mass medium of the day - direct mail - to make these higher-rate offers to consumers across the nation. Through these efforts Citi's credit card operations changed from being the least profitable to the most profitable division among Citigroup.
 
Today Citi offers a variety of cards to consumers and small business owners, with rewards that include cash back, points, and miles. Its cards also provide options for cardholders wishing to transfer balances, manage spending, and plan for larger purchases. In addition, Citi maintains co-brand partnerships with major air carriers like American Airlines and major travel sites like Expedia.
 
Citi primarily issues Mastercard network branded cards, along with a few cards through the American Express network. It currently does not offer Visa or Discover branded cards. It offers rewards credit cards with cash back, generic travel points, and points and miles-based rewards tied to co-branded partner loyalty programs. It also issues several cards targeted to the needs of the small-business community.
 
Citi generally targets consumers and small-business owners with good to excellent credit, though it does offer student and secured card products that can accommodate those with less credit history or lower credit scores.
 
Citi offers multiple cards that earn ThankYou Rewards points, which is Citi's propriety rewards platform. ThankYou points can be redeemed through Citi for airline travel, hotel stays, cash back, merchandise, or gift cards.
 
The following Citi cards earn ThankYou Rewards:
 
Aside from Citi ThankYou Rewards program, Citi offers other rewards cards that include cash back (as with Citi Double Cash) and partner-based programs like airline and travel co-branded cards.
 
Citi received a score of 799 out of 1,000 points in the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study. The average score among major national issuers was 806. Citi offers online access to FICO credit scores through its mobile app and through its secure website when cardholders are logged in. 
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to make sure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale, using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth. 
 
Once all of a card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for the card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, with travel rewards cards we apply significantly more weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
