
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
American Express is a world leader in charge cards and credit cards targeting higher-end consumers and small-business owners, with compelling travel and entertainment rewards. We have researched Amex's most popular cards and applied our objective screening criteria to rate the company's best cards across multiple categories. Below are our picks for the best in class.
 Earn $150 back after you spend $1,000 in purchases on your new card in your first 3 months. 
The Cash Magnet Card ranks as our top-rated American Express card due to its solid cash rewards structure on all spending, no annual fee, and overall annual earnings potential based on typical spending patterns. This is an excellent option for those who favor simple cash back earnings irrespective of spending category without the need to justify an annual fee.
 Earn 80,000 Hilton Honors Bonus Points with the Hilton Honors American Express Card after you use your new Card to make $1,000 in eligible purchases within the first 3 months of Card Membership. 
The Hilton Honors American Express Card is the best Amex hotel option because of its rich rewards structure with high points multiples for Hilton purchases as well as those at U.S. gas stations, U.S. restaurants, and U.S. supermarkets. The base earning rate of 3 points per dollar on all other purchases is particularly impressive given that the card charges no annual fee. Other Hilton cards from American Express do provide higher bonus points for Hilton purchases, but those come with high annual fees.
 Earn a $300 statement credit after you spend $3,000 in purchases on your new Card within the first 6 months. Offer Expires 12/10/2020. 
The Blue Cash Preferred Card from American Express is Investopedia's choice for the best grocery earnings card with its eye-popping bonus for purchases at U.S. supermarkets. Blue Cash Preferred also offers bonus earnings on purchases at U.S. gas stations. The annual fee is $95, but that can be easily justified if this is used as a primary card, especially for grocery spending.
 Earn a $200 statement credit after you spend $1,000 in purchases on your new Card within the first 3 months. 
The Blue Cash Everyday is our choice for the best one-time bonus option from American Express because of its impressive offer of $200 after cardholders meet initial spending requirements from the date of account opening. This is a significant bonus opportunity for a no-annual-fee card.
 Earn 10,000 Bonus Miles after spending $500 in purchases on your new Card in your first 3 months of Card Membership. 
The Delta SkyMiles Blue Card scored highest among American Express co-branded airline cards due to its bonus miles on Delta and restaurant purchases in combination with its lack of an annual fee. While the card doesn't carry the travel-related perks of other Delta Amex cards, it can be a good fit for those who have Delta loyalty but don't fly often enough to justify the higher annual fees involved.
 Earn up to $300 in statement credits. You can earn up to $100 in the form of statement credits per merchant after you make an eligible purchase on your new card during your first 3 months of card membership at each of these merchants: Dell Technologies, DocuSign and FedEx. 
We selected the American Express Blue Business Cash Card as the best business card option from Amex because of its generous 2% cash back on all purchases for up to $50,000 in business spending each year, then 1% after that. This high level of cash back on all purchases can allow small-business owners to earn over $400 a year, based on average spending levels. The Blue Business Cash Card also has no annual fee.
 Earn 60,000 Membership Rewards® Points after you use your new Card to make $5,000 in purchases in your first 3 months. 
The Platinum Card from American Express is our choice for the best travel card available from Amex because of its huge bonus earnings on airfare purchased directly from airlines or through Amextravel.com and on prepaid hotel purchases. The Platinum card also provides an array of valuable travel perks, including airport lounge access, primary auto rental insurance, and TSA Pre/Global Reentry fee offsets. There is a lofty $550 annual fee, but that can be justified for frequent travelers.
 
American Express is a storied and diversified global financial services powerhouse with roots reaching back to the 19th century. It was launched in 1850 to provide express shipments of goods, securities, and currency within New York state. The company is currently a leader in charge card, credit card, and traveler's check lines of business.
 
Since American Express is both a network and a card issuer, it issues cards exclusively on its network-branded platform and doesn't issue Visa, Mastercard, or Discover network-branded cards. Amex primarily offers rewards charge cards and credit cards with cash back, generic travel points, and points tied to co-branded partner loyalty programs. It also has several cards catering to the small-business community.
 
American Express generally requires excellent credit for its card products but also offers a few cards aimed at those with merely good credit. Amex does not offer cards for fair or bad credit and doesn't have options for student or secured credit cards.
 
American Express Membership Rewards are offered on purchases with a select number of Amex cards. Some provide a flat number of points on all purchases, while others offer bonus points on certain spending categories like airfare, prepaid hotels, restaurants, gas, or groceries.
 
The following American Express cards offer Membership Rewards:
 
For more details on Membership Rewards, please see our Ultimate Guide to American Express Membership Rewards.
 
Aside from the American Express rewards program, Amex offers other rewards cards that include cash back (both flat-rate rewards and those with bonus cash back on specific spending categories) and partner-based programs like airline, hotel, and retailer loyalty points.
 
American Express receives excellent marks for its customer service, scoring 838 out of 1,000 points in the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study, putting it second among national card issuers. (The average score among major national issuers was 806.) Only Discover, with 842 points, ranked higher for credit card satisfaction. 
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth. 
 
Once all of a card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for the card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, with travel rewards cards we apply significantly more weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
