
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The best secured credit cards are useful for people with no credit history, or that have bad credit, to use in building a stronger credit score. This list represents our top rated secured cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 
The Capital One Secured card is Investopedia's choice for Best Secured Card due to its low fees and security deposit flexibility, allowing customers to send in their account deposits in installments rather than having to make it all at once. Capital One also offers automatic credit line increase reviews after as little as six months of responsible card use. No annual fee makes this a good entry level card for those needing to build their credit.
 30,000 bonus miles after you spend $3,000 within the first 90 days 
The SKYPASS Visa Secured Card is an unusual offering in the secured card market as it provides the ability to earn airline miles and even has a bonus offer with first purchase. The caveat is that the miles are with Korean Air, so it may be best for those who have loyalty to that carrier or can get value from redeeming SKYPASS miles with partner airlines. There is a $50 annual fee but that can be justified in the first year by the one-time bonus. SKYPASS Visa Secured also offers an anniversary bonus of 1,000 SKYPASS Miles.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Secured is our choice for best for rewards because it offers valuable cash rewards and no annual fee. It's is a solid choice to build good credit habits and potentially boost credit score over time with responsible credit behavior. After eight months as a responsible cardholder, Discover will begin reviewing your account to determine if you can transition to an unsecured card. The Discover it Secured is the closest card you can find to a standard rewards credit card.
 
The Wells Fargo Business Secured Credit Card is our pick for best business secured card, which is an obvious choice since it appears to be the only secured business card in the market. It offers the flexibility of earning cash back or points rewards and the ability to have a credit line up to $25,000. The Wells Fargo Business Secured Card is ideal for small business owners needing to build their business credit or have experienced business credit challenges in the past.
 
The Self Visa is our top rated secured card for credit building because it offers an unusual on-ramp to building a positive credit history through the creation of both an installment loan and a credit card account. If you’re able to meet the Self Visa’s lenient eligibility requirements, you’re granted a CD secured loan. Once you’ve made three on-time loan payments that unlock at least $100 of value in your CD, you can open a secured card using the repaid funds as the security deposit. You earn interest on CD (while also paying interest on the loan), but the card also comes with its own set of interest rates and fees. It offers no rewards or other benefits.
 
Secured credit cards resemble regular credit cards with one key difference: they require a “security” deposit, the size of which determines your credit limit with the card, at least initially. The advantage to this card type, compared with using a debit card tied to a checking account or a prepaid debit card, is that account activity is reported to all three major credit bureaus (because a secured credit card is a true credit card with a real credit limit). That reporting allows you to begin building a credit history that, providing it is positive, should in time allow you to get a regular credit card and other credit products, such as loans.
 
Provided you make on-time payments with a secured card, your security deposit remains untouched and is remitted back to you should you ever close the account. Some issuers even pay you interest on the deposited funds. In time, given a positive record of making payments, issuers may grant you a credit limit that exceeds the security deposit. Eventually, the issuer may also offer you the option to upgrade to a regular—that is, unsecured—credit card. In many cases, that allows the account to remain open, and its increasing age to be an asset to your credit record, which generally rewards having older accounts. If that option isn’t available, though, one can simply close the secured account and apply for an unsecured card once you’ve attained a solid credit score. The free score-monitoring feature offered by most secured cards allows you to track your progress. 
 
The ideal recipient of a secured credit card is someone who has never owned a credit card or any other type of credit account, such as a loan. Such prospective customers have what’s known as a “thin file”, with minimal data at credit bureaus about their payment activity, and so will especially benefit from the credit history a secured credit card will help to build. Those with poor or bad credit, because of irresponsible credit behavior in the past, can potentially gain the same advantage from a secured card. More even than credit newcomers, these customers’ actions—such as habitual late payments, credit defaults, and bankruptcy declarations—can make lenders apprehensive. And that can leave those consumers with few if any options to rebuild their credit other than a secured card.
 
Even if card issuers do not pull a full credit report when reviewing your application, they may want at least to verify your income and determine if you have any other accounts, like checking or savings accounts, with banks and other financial institutions. That information allows issuers to gain a fuller picture of your finances, including your ability to make a security deposit
 Provides widely accepted charge cards to those with little credit, no credit, or bad credit Excellent chance of approval Reports to credit bureaus to build personal credit Security deposit is required; may be difficult for those with limited funds Credit limit does not exceed security deposit, at least initially Annual fee is more common than not Higher APRs on balances than most non-secured cards 
In contrast to such alternatives as prepaid debit cards, all card transactions and payment activities with a secured card are reported to the major credit bureaus—Equifax, Experian and TransUnion. Good financial behavior, such as staying within your credit limit and making on-time payments, has a positive effect on your credit history, and that in turn will help you build a strong credit score.
 
These are some of the capabilities and attributes to seek in one of these cards:
 
Certain card issuers let you make deposit payments in installments over a period of time. This can facilitate reaching the required amount, especially for those who lack a bank account, a savings program, or both.
 
While most issuers limit the available credit limit to the size of the security deposit you’ve made, a select few give consumers a little more slack by allowing credit lines to graduate to a multiple of the deposit, like 125% or 150% of its amount. There are also variations in the maximum security deposit you can make. Some issuers cap this at $2,500 but a few allow deposits of up to $10,000.
 
Some issuers impose high monthly usage fees on those who own secured cards, as well as stiff annual fees to get the account in the first place. Avoid the cards from such issuers, if possible, since there are plenty of options that charge no or low fees. And, needless to say, review the fee disclosures in the terms and conditions for any card to understand its costs before you apply for it.
 
Certain issuers provide this valuable service that can allow you to check your score at any time online while some print it on monthly billing statements. This can be very helpful since those seeking this type of account are in great need of seeing and tracking their score growth over time and understanding the impact of their credit behavior.
 
While it isn’t the norm, a few secured credit cards do provide cash back rewards on their spending. The rate is typically modest, at 1% or so, but these perks are worth seeking out, provided the card meets the other items on your wish list. Rewards are credited back to your billing statement or sent to you as a check at the end of the year. 
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
