
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
When you need to borrow money, your credit score is key. If it's a high one, a lot of choices and favorable terms are open to you. However, if your credit score only registers as fair (in the 580 to 669 range on the FICO score scale), finding a great deal on a personal loan can be a bit more challenging. Some lenders may not consider you at all. While others will, their financing terms will be stiff, with interest rates several percentage points higher than those extended to the applicants they deem more creditworthy.
 
To put it bluntly, with fair credit you probably won't qualify for the best personal loan offers on the market. But take heart: There still are numerous lenders out there willing to let you borrow money at a decent price. Interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and other terms can vary widely from one lender to the next. To jump-start your search, we’ve done the research to make comparing your options easier. We've narrowed the potential lenders down to the five best choices, each sterling in a different way.
 
Online lender Upstart earned Investopedia’s "best overall" spot for several reasons. First, it offers maximum borrowing flexibility: personal loans of up to $50,000 that you can use for just about anything. Second, its minimum credit score requirement starts at 600, which is in the middle of the fair credit category.
 
To Upstart, you are more than your credit score (as its motto proclaims). In addition to your credit report/history, Upstart's AI-powered underwriting process also considers additional factors, such as your education, area of study, and job history.﻿﻿ This alternative data can be a boon to borrowers with only fair credit, helping them qualify for a lower interest rate than they might otherwise.
 There’s no prepayment penalty if you want to pay your loan off early. A soft credit inquiry can help you check your rate before you officially apply (without dinging your score). Your employment and education history are considered in setting terms. Maximum APR is high at 35.99%. It has potentially high origination fees—up to 8%. Only two loan lengths are offered. Low maximum loan amount of $50,000 
Other important information:﻿﻿
 
One factor that often dampens credit scores is having a mountain of debt in relation to your income—maxed-out credit cards, etc. If that’s your situation, a particular type of personal loan, called a "debt consolidation loan," can be a solution. Not only does it combine and pay off those outstanding credit card balances and other high-interest debts; it also can potentially improve your credit score in the process. And Payoff might be able to help.
 
Payoff isn’t a lender. Rather, it describes itself as a "financial wellness company" that works with lending partners, who do the actual financing.﻿﻿ You’ll need fair credit or better to qualify for a debt consolidation loan (the only type Payoff offers) through the platform. $40,000 is the maximum amount you may be approved to borrow.
 
According to Payoff, its members see an average FICO score increase of 40 points after they use one of its loans.﻿﻿
 There are no late/annual/application fees and no prepayment penalty. You can check your rate before you apply with a soft credit inquiry. You get free monthly FICO scores as a borrower benefit. The maximum loan amount is low. Loans can only be used to consolidate debt. It takes a long time to receive funds compared with other lenders. 
Other important information:﻿﻿
 
For consumers with credit scores on the lower end of the fair credit range, qualifying for a personal loan can be especially difficult. LendingPoint offers loans up to $25,000 to borrowers with credit scores as low as 585. Even people who have filed for bankruptcy may be eligible, as long as the bankruptcy has been discharged for 12 months or longer. 
 
In exchange for looser approval criteria, however, be prepared for the possibility that your loan may cost more than it would if your credit was in better shape. Interest rates with LendingPoint start at 9.99%
 Low credit score requirements Check your rate before you apply with a soft credit inquiry No prepayment penalty Low maximum loan amount of $25,000 High maximum APR of 35.99% Possible origination fee of up to 6% 
Other important information:
 
Strange as it may seem in this digital day and age, many personal loan lenders (especially the online-platform types, like the ones on our list) don’t have mobile apps. Or if they do, the app’s functions are limited to the basics—monitoring balances and that sort of thing. Upgrade stands apart in this department.
 
It not only offers an app; it offers a state-of-the-art app: You can use it to manage your account, check your credit score on the go, and even apply for loans.﻿﻿ Admittedly, the app’s user ratings—3.8 stars in the Apple App Store and 3.7 stars on Google Play—do suggest room for improvement. But, when you consider that few personal loan lenders that cater to fair-credit borrowers offer mobile device tools at all, the scores are pretty good. 
 
Upgrade has plenty of loan options. Whether you want to consolidate debt, pay down high-interest credit cards, make a major purchase, or finance a home improvement project, this lender may well have a financing solution to suit your needs.﻿﻿ Well-qualified borrowers may be able to access up to $35,000 in funding, with APRs starting as low as 7.99%. On the downside, Upgrade subjects all personal loans to an origination fee, unlike many lenders.
 Check your rate before you apply with a soft credit inquiry Free weekly TransUnion credit score (VantageScore 3.0) Range of loan sizes from $1,000 to $35,000 An origination fee on all loans, regardless of your credit score Only two loan lengths offered High maximum APR 
Other important information:﻿﻿
 
Read the full review: Upgrade
 
The Best Egg online lending platform stands out for its happy clients. The lender has received six complaints from consumers who filed a report with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in the last year. That’s a low number, comparatively. By comparison, some other personal loan lenders received dozens of CFPB complaints within the same time frame. Some of the better-known lenders catering to fair-credit applicants have racked up complaints in the hundreds, including Avant (528 complaints), Credible (262 complaints), Prosper (347 complaints), and Rocket Loans (213 complaints).
 
At Best Egg you may qualify for a personal loan of up to $35,000 with a credit score as low as 640, and it offers interest rates starting at 5.99%. But, you need a minimum 700 FICO score and a minimum individual annual income of $100,000 to qualify for the lowest APR (as the Best Egg site does disclose, albeit in tiny print).﻿﻿ On the plus side, if you’re in a rush to access funds, you might receive your loan proceeds as soon as one business day after approval.
 Borrowing flexibility: a wide variety of approved purposes No prepayment penalty Potentially receive funds in one business day Lowest interest rates only for high-income borrowers with good-range FICO scores Origination fee as high as 6.99% Low maximum loan amount of $35,000 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Best Egg
 
PenFed Credit Union offers one of the least restrictive membership requirements —simply pay $17 to join the Voice for America’s Troops or National Military Family Organization. The lender offers competitive rates for those with fair credit as well as access to other products offering plenty of benefits. Rates for personal loans start at 6.49% and you can borrow as little as $500.
 No origination fees or prepayment penalties Low minimum personal loan amount Joint applications available Membership requirements need to be met to qualify for a loan Applicants need to go through a hard credit inquiry to check rates Low maximum loan amount 
Other important information:
 
Peerform offers more competitive rates compared to other peer-to-peer lending platforms—their origination fees are slightly lower than competitors. Rates start at 5.99% and applicants can borrow a minimum of $4,000. Although the platform doesn’t seem as intuitive as others, it’s still a worthwhile lender to check out.
 Soft credit inquiry when checking initial rate No prepayment penalties Borrowers can qualify for a loan even with a short credit history Applicants will be charged origination fees Individual applications only High minimum loan amount 
Other important information:
 
Navy Federal Credit Union offers personal loans as low as $250 and for those who don’t have the best credit rating. However, being a member of the credit union is one of the requirements to apply for a loan. To join, you need to be a member of the National Guard, armed forces, Department of Defense or be an immediate family member of one.
 Joint applications allowed Loan terms as short as six months Low minimum loan amounts Applicants need to be subject to a hard credit inquiry Membership required to receive loan proceeds Higher loan amounts could mean a higher APR 
Other important information:
 
It's important to know where you currently sit in terms of credit worthiness.
 
Improving your credit score may go a long way toward helping you qualify for a personal loan and getting a better interest rate if you’re approved. If you’re not happy with your current number, the good news is you can take steps to try to improve it. Credit score changes often take time, but here are some simple strategies to help you get started. 
 
You can access a free report from Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax once every 12 months at AnnualCreditReport.com. In fact, it’s wise to check your reports often to make sure that they are accurate. If you discover fraud or mistakes on your credit reports, federal law lets you dispute those errors with the credit reporting agencies.
 
When you send a dispute, the credit reporting agency that receives it typically has 30 days (sometimes 45) to investigate your claim. Any information that cannot be verified as accurate must be removed from your credit report. When negative errors come off your credit report, your score may improve. 
 
Unlike your three credit reports, there are many options when it comes to checking your credit scores. You can find a number of no-cost credit score–checking options online, but the result you get likely won’t be the same FICO credit score a lender will use when you apply for a loan. Still, keeping an eye on the numbers can be helpful. If the credit score you consistently check online is trending upward, it’s a good sign that you’re managing your spending and debt well.
 
If you have a credit card, your card issuer or bank may give you free FICO credit score access. You can also go straight to the source. Through its site myfico.com, FICO itself will give you your score, though it charges for its single-use and monthly packages.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ 
 
The relationship between your credit card limits and balances, called your credit utilization ratio, matters a lot where your credit score is concerned. The closer you come to maxing out your cards—to using up all your available credit—your ratio goes up, and it acts as a drag on your score. If you lower your credit utilization ratio by paying down your credit card balances, your credit score might increase.
 
Paying on time won’t boost your credit score per se, but it can prevent you from losing points. Payment history is worth 35% of your FICO score. 
 
Working to earn better credit is one of the most effective ways to increase your approval odds for any type of financing—personal loans included. In addition to focusing on your credit, the following steps might help. 
 
Lenders look at your debt-to-income ratio (DTI) when you apply for a loan. DTI is somewhat similar to your credit utilization ratio, only it’s a measurement of your monthly gross income compared with your monthly payment obligations on debt. Paying down debt has the potential to save you money on interest and lower your DTI. A lower DTI could bode well for you when you apply for new financing. 
 
Some lenders allow you to include a cosigner on your loan application. Serving as an additional repayment source, a cosigner can help you qualify altogether or obtain loan terms that you may have otherwise not been approved for—a better interest rate or a larger amount of principal—especially if your cosigner has a good credit score.
 
However, there are some serious downsides to cosigning. First, in the event of a divorce or separation, joint debts can be difficult to separate. The credit reports and scores of you and your co-borrower could be damaged if there’s a disagreement about who’s responsible for the debt. Additionally, you’re asking your potential cosigner to accept considerable risk. Cosigners are just as responsible for debts as primary borrowers. If you ever pay late or default on the loan, both of your credit scores could suffer for years to come. 
 
When you have fair credit, your borrowing choices are limited. You may be tempted to go with the first lender that will qualify you when you need a personal loan. However, the truth is that you have options. You might not qualify for the lowest rate and best terms available, but that doesn’t mean you should settle.
 
Take the time to research your available options and go with the personal loan that’s the best fit for your financial profile and need. You can always work to improve your credit in the future, so that the next time you need to borrow, you’ll have even more choices.   
 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders for all borrowing needs. We collected more than 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Upstart.com. "Better rates through better data." Accessed March 18, 2020. Upstart.com. "A Smarter Personal Loan." Accessed Oct. 12, 2020. Payoff.com. "Frequently Asked Questions: Is Payoff a bank?" Accessed March 18, 2020. Payoff.com. "Frequently Asked Questions: Will checking my rate for the Payoff Loan affect my credit?" Accessed March 18, 2020. Payoff.com. "The Payoff Loan." Accessed March 18, 2020. LendingPoint.com. "Frequently Asked Questions: Applying for a Loan: Am I eligible to apply for a LendingPoint loan?" Accessed March 18, 2020.