
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
We've spent thousands of hours analyzing the credit card market in order to identify the best credit cards for a wide range of needs and objectives. This list represents our top rated cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we may receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 Under normal circumstances, this list would be ordered by overall star rating but that would result in featuring hotel and travel cards near the top of our list. We still think those cards may be the best long-term fit for people and have kept them on our list. But given the novel coronavirus pandemic and its impact to the global economy we've elected to highlight cards that may be more suited to immediate needs. Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One Quicksilver Credit Card is our best overall credit card and best for cash back because of its combination of low fees, low interest and high rewards earning rate. With no annual fee you don't need to worry about making sure you're extracting maximum value from the card every year to make it worth it. The absence of a foreign-transaction fee makes this a rare cash-back credit card that’s worth bringing on a trip abroad once travel is no longer a public health concern and helps to make a compelling case that if you're only going to carry one card that this should be it.
 40,000 bonus miles after you spend $2,000 on purchases in the first 3 months your account is open. 
Based on our analysis, the United Explorer offers the highest value per mile earned of any airline credit card, and miles can be redeemed in multiple ways, including for flights on member participating airlines in its Star Alliance, one of the largest global airline partnerships. As with our best hotel card, you'd need to be committed to United as the airline you'll primarily fly with in order to extract the maximum benefit from the card. The compelling introductory bonus of the card really adds to the value of the card because of the high value placed on redeeming those points with United. The $95 annual fee is in line with its competitors and is waived the first year. The card does not charge foreign-transaction fees which helps make it a good choice for international travel. United recently announced that they have permanently eliminated reservation change fees, which should greatly reduce any traveler anxiety around booking future award travel with earned miles and make the introductory bonus on this card that much more appealing.
 50,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Chase Sapphire Reserve is our best credit card for travel because of it's competitive one-time point bonus, annual travel credit, high rewards earning rate, the fact that points are worth 50% more if you redeem them for travel through the Chase Ultimate Rewards portal, and the ability to transfer points on a 1:1 basis to eligible hotel and airline partners. While the annual fee is high, if you're an avid traveler the annual travel credit can help justify it and it has numerous other travel-related benefits that make this the best card for travel if you're not ready to commit yourself to a single airline or hotel.
 25,000 bonus points if you make at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of your account opening - which can be redeemed for a $250 statement credit toward travel purchases. 
The Bank of America Travel Rewards for Students is our pick for the best student credit card because of the high earning rate on its rewards program that you can then redeem all sorts of travel expenses. It also has a long introductory APR on purchases and no annual fee which add to the card's strong rating. Plus, the lack of foreign-transaction fees makes this an ideal card for student travel outside the U.S. Bank of America Travel Rewards for Students also offers excellent credit education and monitoring services.
 Earn 25,000 Bonus Points after you spend $3,000 on purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. Plus, earn an additional 25,000 Bonus Points after you spend $6,000 total on purchases within the first 6 months of account opening. 
The World of Hyatt Credit Card is our best for hotels because it consistently offers the highest point redemption value of any hotel program we have analyzed, though the points tend to be more challenging to accumulate compared to other hotel programs. The World of Hyatt Credit Card also offers a competitive one-time bonus, a complimentary night at a category 1-4 Hyatt hotel on each cardmember anniversary, and a very high earning rate on spend at Hyatt hotels. These benefits could quickly justify the card’s annual fee.
 Earn 80,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. That's $1,000 when redeeming points for eligible purchases with the new Pay Yourself Back tool (currently, groceries, dining, home improvement and select charities), or for travel when you redeem through Chase Ultimate Rewards. 
The Chase Sapphire Preferred has a bonus (potentially worth up to $1,000) as large or larger than the bonuses with many ultra-premium travel cards with an annual fee that is substantially less than cards with competitive one-time bonuses. It also has flexible redemption options and generous rewards making it one of the most valuable travel-rewards cards on the market. It pays 2 points per dollar spent on travel and restaurant purchases, with each point worth a cent for cash back, but worth 1.25 cents if redeemed for travel through Chase Ultimate Rewards. The $95 annual fee can easily be justified by the travel and dining rewards you could earn over the course of a year.
 Earn 100,000 bonus points after you spend $15,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
Investopedia's pick for best business credit card is the Ink Business Preferred card from Chase because of its strong points rewards program through Chase's Ultimate Rewards program that receive a 25% premium when redeemed for travel. The card also pairs really well with other Chase business and consumer cards that earn Ultimate Rewards. Ink Preferred also currently offers the highest introductory bonus of any business card in the business card market at 100,000 points after spending $15,000 in purchases during the first three months of account opening. This bonus is worth $1,250 when redeemed for travel through Chase Ultimate Rewards.
 
We chose the Citi Simplicity Card as the best balance transfer card in the market primarily due to its exceptionally long 18 month 0% APR introductory period along with consumer-friendly terms like no annual fee, no late fees or penalty rates. While Simplicity offers no rewards we don't consider that a negative in the case of a balance transfer card, as rewards can tempt counterproductive additional spending when trying to dig out from debt. Citi does charge a 3% balance transfer fee but the length of the introductory period justifies extra cost in terms of savings potential.
 
The Capital One Secured Mastercard is Investopedia's choice for Best Secured Card due to its lack of an annual fee and its security deposit flexibility, allowing customers to make installment deposits over time rather than all up front. Capital One also provides automatic credit line increases over time with responsible card use and offers an array of non-secured card options that customers can consider once they have built up their credit scores. No annual fee makes the Capital One Secured Mastercard an affordable on-ramp to establishing a positive credit history.
 
While we considered a wide range of factors, we chose the best overall credit cards based mostly on their combination of low fees; low, or at least competitive, interest rate; promotional introductory APR, if any, on purchases and balance transfers; and compelling rewards. However, we also selected the best cards in select categories based on how well they addressed specific consumer needs or priorities.
 
The best credit card may not, however, be the best one you can actually get. People with low credit scores may be able only to qualify for cards that carry higher interest rates and fewer rewards.
 Those with excellent credit can generally have their choice of travel and other rewards credit cards that provide lucrative one-time bonuses and significant ongoing rewards in the form of cash back, points, or frequent flyer miles. 
Deciding which type of card is best for you is based on your personal credit situation, lifestyle and preferences. Below are some tips on how to navigate the selection process.
 
Finding the best credit card entails both self-consideration and research. You must document your creditworthiness and spending habits, along with reflecting on how you may use the card, whether to build credit, temporarily borrow, or simply employ as a purchasing convenience and a way to earn rewards.
 
If you are new to credit or have impaired credit, a secured credit card can be a great option. This type of card requires a security deposit but has the advantage that activity with the card is reported to all three credit bureaus, which helps the cardholder build credit over time. Many secured cards offer an option to graduate to a non-secured card after a period of on-time payments.
 
For those who are carrying a card balance should consider shifting the debt to a balance-transfer card with much lower interest, or even no interest rate at all for a period. These cards provide relief in the form of an extended period of a 0% APR on the transfer, which allows you to pay down the balance more easily. While some balance-transfer cards offer rewards as well, it’s best to not add to your balance on the card (or, preferably, any other card) until you have paid off the amount you’ve transferred.
 If you frequently carry a credit card balance, you should avoid cards with high fees and interest regardless of attractive rewards and one-time bonuses. Your priority should be paying down your debt and avoiding accumulating more, not trying to earn rewards. 
People who tend to pay their card balance off each month should consider getting a rewards card that offers cash-back or points rewards. These cards allow you to leverage your everyday spending to earn hundreds of dollars worth of rewards, usually with no annual fee.
 
For frequent travelers, a general travel card or one issued in partnership with airlines or hotels can make the most sense. These allow you to leverage spending on travel and in other categories to earn rewards that can be used to obtain further travel.
 
Entrepreneurs and small-business owners can choose among a host of business credit cards designed for their needs. These cards may reward business spending both in certain categories, like shipping, or with specific business-related merchants, such as office-supply stores).
 
College students generally don’t have a credit history, but they do represent a good long term customer for card issuers. Cards designed for students can provide online resources to instruct new cardmembers on the responsible use of credit and other tips to guide personal finances.
 
The higher your credit score, the more credit cards you potentially have available to you, and the better those cards tend to be in terms of interest rates, credit lines, and reward programs. To understand your card choices, it’s important, then, to know the broad range into which your credit score fits. Card issuers classify scores as “Excellent”, “Very Good”, “Good”, “Fair” or “Poor.” It’s best to only apply for cards that best match the credit recommended by the issuer.(Our card reviews list the recommended credit range for the particular card, as provided by the card issuer.
 
If you don’t know your current credit score, it’s available in a number of ways, and at no cost. There are two main credit score types, FICO and VantageScore, both of which have their own distinct scoring algorithms and score ranges that are used by various lenders.
 
Other factors beyond credit score are considered by card issuers in evaluating creditworthiness, including employment status, income, and other credit and deposit accounts you own.
 
There are credit cards designed for those whose credit is fair, poor, and even very poor or bad credit. In particular, a secured credit card allows those with bad credit or no credit history to build or rebuild their score. Until they’ve completed that process, they must retain the use of the card through a security deposit that usually serves as the maximum credit line for the account. 
 
Credit card rewards come in a variety of forms, allowing cardholders to earn cash back, points or miles for each dollar of spending. The earnings rates for rewards often vary by purchase type, with higher rewards available for certain categories of purchases.
 
Cash-back rewards are the most straightforward type, and usually rebate a percentage of spending in the form of a check or statement credit. Rewards based on points or miles offer greater flexibility in how they are redeemed, whether as travel, gift cards, merchandise, or more. 
 
Travel-rewards credit cards may be general in type, earning points that can be redeemed for travel on any airline or hotel, or partner-specific, and thus co-branded with a particular airline or hotel. Co-branded cards provide less flexibility in redeeming rewards but potentially more value from them, provided you’re comfortable favoring a particular brand of airline or hotel chain.
 
While issuers may prominently tout certain features of their cards, other benefits tend to be buried in cards’ fine print—including some you might not realize the card even offers. Here’s a quick list of benefits that are commonly offered with a range of card types:
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
