
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
There are numerous rewards credit cards on the market, but many provide special benefits for online shopping based on their rewards programs and security features. The best credit cards for online shopping offer both top-notch online security features and compelling rewards for online shopping. This list represents our top rated cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we may receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Cash Back card is our choice for the best online shopping card in terms of its first year cash back (which is doubled in year one) and because it offers 5% cash back on Amazon.com purchases during the fourth quarter of 2020 (up to $1,500 in spending). The doubling of the first year cash back can equate to 10% back on Amazon purchases Oct - Dec. 2020.
 Online $200 cash rewards bonus after making at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of your account opening. 
The Bank of America Cash Back card offers bonus cash back on an eligible category of your choice, which can include online shopping portals - making it our pick for the card offering the best online rewards flexibility. This can allow cardholders to earn rich rewards on Amazon and other online purchases throughout the year. The bonus category spending is capped but can still provide a strong return on online spending if used strategically.
 Earn 5% back in Walmart stores for the first 12 months when you use your Capital One Walmart Rewards Card with Walmart Pay - the quick and secure way to pay with your phone at Walmart. 
We chose the Capital One Walmart Rewards Mastercard as the best card for Walmart.com because of its lucrative 5% cash back rewards program for Walmart.com and Walmart App purchases including Walmart groceries ordered online and available for curbside pickup. For those who seek low prices and favor shopping at Walmart this card can deliver a valuable return on digital spending.
 
The Costco Anywhere Visa card is our choice for best online shopping card for wholesales clubs because of its unlimited 2% cash back rewards through Costco.com and in-store purchases. Executive club members also earn an additional 2% cash back as part of their membership terms.
 Get a $70 Amazon.com Gift Card instantly upon credit card approval. 
We chose the Amazon Prime Visa Signature card as our pick for best online shopping rewards from Amazon.com and Whole Foods groceries due to its unlimited 5% cash back rewards for purchase from the website and online grocery orders for those with an eligible Amazon Prime membership.
 
While all credit cards can be used to shop online, some are better suited than others for this type of purchase activity. There isn’t such a thing as a pure online shopping card, but there are many that offer better protections and incentives in the form of cash back, points, or miles.
 
Using a credit card to shop online is safer than other options, such as a debit card tied to a checking account, because credit cards have more consumer protections under the law. Many card issuers go beyond the requirements of the law to offer additional safeguards against fraud and unauthorized use.  
 
The credit card networks (Visa, Mastercard, Discover, and American Express) provide $0 liability coverage for any and all unauthorized purchases. Debit cards—both those tied to checking accounts and prepaid debit cards—don’t offer this level of protection, unless transactions are processed as a credit at the point of sale instead of as a debit. A consumer’s liability with a debit card is generally limited to $50 if they notify their bank or issuer within two business days of card loss or fraud, which is a much more strict requirement compared with credit cards.
 
Online shopping for merchandise and food delivery (both for groceries and take-out orders) was already growing exponentially before the COVID-19 pandemic and is now a critical part of life. With that in mind, we've reviewed the rewards cards currently in the market to find the ones that offer the best combination of rewards earning opportunities and online shopping protections. 
 
These are the critical factors we think you should consider when evaluating credit cards for online shopping.
 
Almost all credit cards offer $0 liability protection for unauthorized purchases, but it’s still important to verify that in the terms and conditions before applying. Even for cards that don’t offer this protection, federal law limits losses resulting from credit card fraud to $50, so at least there is a backstop in place to protect consumers if they are victims of fraud. While these protections cover offline transactions as well online ones, they are especially important for online transactions, which often entail greater fraud risk for the consumer.
 
This customer service security feature can alert you immediately should your card be used without your permission or knowledge.
 
Being able to easily communicate with a customer service representative is important for quickly resolving any security concerns. 
 
This feature lets you lock down your credit account so no one can use it, in case you believe it has been compromised.
 
Some issuers offer virtual card numbers for one-time use. That can provide a virtually impenetrable level of security when shopping online, and can be especially useful when you’re shopping on smaller or international websites that may not follow the latest security protocols.
 
Before selecting a card for online shopping check to see how it would reward you for your existing online spending patterns. The best cards for online shopping provide bonus rewards for purchases made with certain online retailers or in particular spending categories.
 
Some card issuers have created online shopping portals that provide extra rebates or discounts for merchandise and services.
 
As most of us know by now, online shopping is tremendously convenient, and the widespread advent of free shipping has made it all the more economical. However, it also requires taking some extra precautions.
 
While it's tempting to store your credit card details on the secure sites of your favorite online retailers, that can expose you to undue risk if the retailer’s server is ever compromised. Some of the biggest data breaches in recent history have exposed shoppers’ personal information, including sensitive credit card data, and this information ends up for sale to the highest bidder on the dark web.
 
When appropriate, also consider using a virtual card number, as described above, if your card issuer offers that option.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
