
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
We've spent thousands of hours analyzing cash back credit cards in order to identify the best cash back cards for a range of needs and objectives. The best cash back credit cards allow you to leverage your everyday spending to earn the most basic, most flexible reward currency: cash, usually in the form of a mailed check or a statement credit. This list represents our top rated cash back cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One Quicksilver Credit Card is our best card for cash back because it has the best combination of low fees, low interest, high rewards earning rate and one-time bonus. While this card doesn't offer quite as high an earning rate as the Citi Double Cash, the absence of a foreign-transaction fee and the one-time bonus make this a better overall cash back card. The fact that this card rates so well across the board makes a compelling case that if you're only going to carry one card in your wallet that this should be it.
 Earn $500 when you spend $4,500 in the first 3 months of account opening. 
The Capital One Spark Cash for Business is our pick for the best cash back option available to small business owners as it pays an impressive and unlimited 2% cash back earnings rate on all business purchases. This represents the highest fixed cash back rate available for business or consumer cards and can provide significant savings to business owners while avoiding the need to monitor spending categories or spending caps.
 Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One SavorOne Rewards is our best cash back card for dining because it offers unlimited 3% cash back rewards on dining and entertainment, with no annual fee. Its 1% cash back rewards on all other purchases is lower than the 1.5% you can get from our top pick so this may not make for the best primary card for you to use. But as an option to use exclusively for dining out, this is your best option in a cash back card. Since there is no annual fee with SavorOne it can be a good card to pair with another cash back or rewards card that offers a better earnings rate for non-dining purchases.
 $200 cash back after you spend $500 on purchases in your first 3 months from account opening. Plus earn 5% cash back on grocery store purchases (not including Target or Walmart) on up to $12,000 spent in the first year. 
The Chase Freedom Unlimited has one of the best one-time bonuses, offering $200 after spending only $500 in the first 3 months of account opening along with a 5% cash back grocery store offer on up to $12,000 spent in the first year, making it our top pick for this category. The card's earning structure was recently enhanced allowing cardmembers to earn 5% cash back on travel purchased through Chase, 3% on dining including takeout and drugstores, and 1.5% on all other purchases. Freedom Unlimited pairs well with other Chase rewards cards like Sapphire Preferred and Sapphire Reserve, as it allows you to earn a higher return in spending categories those cards don't favor and then to pool and transfer Ultimate Rewards points.
 
The Citi Double Cash is our best cash back card for a high earning rate because it offers a compelling and somewhat unique cash back rewards proposition: you earn 1% in cash back on purchases when you use the card, then an additional 1% when you make payment. There’s no one-time bonus, but this card’s high universal rewards and flexible redemption options make it a potentially lucrative option nonetheless, whether as a standalone card or one to be paired with another rewards card that offers higher rewards on certain spending categories.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
Most cards for bad credit have no rewards component, an annual fee and numerous other fees. We chose the Discover it Secured card because it offers real value to those with less than perfect credit in the form of bonus cash back rewards at gas stations and restaurants and 1% cash back on all other spending - all with no annual fee. A security deposit is required but Discover automatically reviews customer accounts for an upgrade consideration to an unsecured account after 8 months of responsible use.
 
Cash back credit cards work like other types of rewards cards except their owners earn cash back rather than points or miles for each dollar of spending (A few cash back cards do, however, convert cash back into points). Cash back is calculated as a percentage of each dollar you spend. Your cumulative cash back earnings are then tallied monthly by your card issuer and included on your billing statement for future redemption.  
 
As with the various other types of credit card reward programs, cash back cards come in many stripes and have these positive and negative aspects:
 Many have a one-time bonus with a low spending requirement Dollar rewards are simple Many cards have no annual fee Options to redeem rewards can be somewhat limited Some require keeping track of tiered rates or registering for rotating bonus categories Redeeming rewards generally not automatic 
Here are questions and steps to help you decide how well a cash back credit card might suit you and your finances: 
 
The first step to determining your cash back earning potential is to look at your total average monthly spending. Review a number of months of spending for the purchases you might charge to a new card.
 
Next, consider the implications of your spending on the card type that works best for you. If your spending is low, you may be hard-pressed to earn the more demanding one-time bonuses of other card types. Similarly, your spending may not be sufficient to earn the rewards you need to offset the annual fee of such a card. Those realities make a cash back card without a fee a wise choice if you don’t spend a lot each month on credit cards, or who don’t yet know what you might spend on a new card. 
 
Cash—and cash back—could hardly be simpler. By contrast, as we’ve noted, the value of rewards earned in points or miles is less immediately evident. It often varies by the redemption option you choose and your expertise in maximizing the return on every point or mile. Favor a cash back card if you have little interest in mastering the intricacies of maximizing rewards.
 
Knowing a cash back card will meet your needs, you now face the task to select one that best meets them. Here are some questions to help you navigate the selection process:  
 
Since rewards among cash back cards vary by category, it’s important to know as precisely as possible the amounts you typically spend in which categories every month. Budgeting/tracking tools such as Mint can help with this task, since they automatically assign expenses to such spending categories as groceries, dining, and gasoline. 
 
Armed with your spending record, you’re ready to assess how much you might earn each month or year on the cards you’re considering. That requires running the math. 
 
For example, let’s say you spend $2,000 a month, and of that $500 is for groceries, $200 for dining, and $100 for gasoline. Let’s further say you’re comparing a fixed-rate card that pays 1.5% on all spending with one that has rotating rewards, of 5% on gas in one quarter, on groceries in another quarter, and on restaurants for yet another quarter, plus 1% on all other spending. Under this scenario, the fixed-rate card would earn you $360 (based on $2,000 in monthly spending x 1.5% = $30 each month x 12 months = $360 per year.) The rotating-rewards card would earn $240 (based on $500 in groceries x 5% x 3 months, totaling $75 + $200 in dining x 5% x 3 months, totalling $30 + $100 in gasoline x 5% x 3 months, for $15 = $120. Then, outside the rotating rewards, there’s $1,200 x 1% x 12 months = $144. Grand total $120 + $144 = $264.) As you can see, in this comparison the card that offered a flat rate fared much better.
 
If a card with tiered or rotating rewards emerges as a strong contender for you, you now need to consider the extra attention they demand—and the effort you’re prepared to exert for additional rewards. You might decide that keeping track of tiered rewards is worthwhile, if there are only two tiers on the card. But cards with multiple tiers, or rotating rewards for which you must register, may be more work than their higher rewards justify. 
 
While many cash back cards have no annual fee, don’t necessarily rule out those that do carry one. For-fee cards generally offer the highest cash back earnings. If the earnings rate of a cash back card with an annual fee looks enticing, simply calculate the yearly earnings, using your predicted spending, and then subtract the cost of the fee from the total. Then compare how the earnings figure (less the fee) stacks up against other cards that don’t charge an annual fee.
 
Your new cash back card needn’t—and likely won’t—be the only card you own. For many people, it makes sense to pair a cash back credit card with at least one other card, likely one that offers points rewards.Some issuers even provide incentives for such pairing by allowing rewards from the two cards to be pooled. That way, earned cash back can be converted and transferred to the rewards account for the points card. You’re then free to use cash back rewards to capitalize on earnings opportunities provided by rewards programs and the transfer of miles or points.
 
Earning the most cash back you can on a card entails taking advantage of all tiered or bonus spending categories, at least up to the quarterly or annual maximum, if those are capped. It also requires planning spending so as to earn any one-time introductory bonus, if offered. A warning, however: Don’t overspend, and so carry a balance, in order to reach the spending requirement for a one-time bonus, or otherwise simply to earn rewards. Unless you’re currently benefiting from a 0% APR offer, the interest you will pay on outstanding balances almost always negates any rewards earnings. 
 
Cash back rewards are easier to understand than points or miles but they can entail several types of redemption options: 
 
For this list of the best cash back credit cards we considered cards with three different types of cash back rewards structures: flat cash back, tiered cash back, and cash back with rotating categories that offer higher cash back percentages for short periods (typically three months).
 
Also, as part of our selection criteria we evaluated which cash back credit cards were best among certain subcategories such as one-time bonus, gasoline, grocery, and restaurant spending. As part of our ongoing rating process we will re-score and publish updates of this list every month going forward.  
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
