
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Bank of America ranks as the fourth largest issuer of credit cards in terms of cards in circulation and outstanding balances. One of the biggest issuers of cards on the Visa network, Bank of America has more than 5,500 branches across the U.S. and offers cards for those seeking travel-related and cash-back rewards, as well as student, balance transfer, and business credit cards. We have researched and scored the most popular Bank of America cards to find the best ones for different consumer and business needs.
 25,000 bonus points if you make at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of your account opening - which can be redeemed for a $250 statement credit toward travel purchases. 
We rate the Bank of America Travel Rewards card as the best overall Bank of America card because of its generous rewards on all purchases and excellent bonus opportunity. Its travel redemption options and its lack of an annual fee or foreign transaction fees earn it the top spot for best no-annual-fee travel card, as well.
 25,000 bonus points if you make at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of your account opening - which can be redeemed for a $250 statement credit toward travel purchases. 
The Bank of America Travel Rewards for Students is our pick for the best Bank of America option for students because it shares the same rewards structure and bonus with the standard consumer version of the card. The lack of an annual fee or foreign transaction fees make this an excellent long-term card, ideal for travel abroad.
 Earn 50,000 bonus points after you make at least $3,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of account opening. 
The Bank of America Premium Rewards card is our choice for the best travel card from Bank of America due to its enhanced points on travel purchases and 1.5 points on all other purchases. The card does charge a $95 annual fee, though that is line with other popular travel rewards cards from competing issuers and should be easily justified with consistent use. The one-time bonus that cardholders can earn after meeting initial spending requirements is valued at $500.
 Online $200 cash rewards bonus after making at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of your account opening. 
We selected the Bank of America Cash Rewards card as the best cash-back rewards option from Bank of America because of its lucrative cash-back rate on purchases and simple statement credit, check, or gift card redemption options. The card offers bonus earnings on a category of choice as well as enhanced earning on grocery purchases, with a base rate on all other purchases.
 30,000 bonus points when you spend $3,000 in the first 90 days. 
We chose the Business Advantage Travel Rewards as our top pick for Bank of America business cards because of its competitive earnings on all spending and the ability to double the value of points earned when redeeming for travel through the Bank of America travel center. Regular redemption is as simple requesting points be applied to travel purchases. The one-time bonus is valued at $300 which is excellent for a no-annual-fee business card.
 
Bank of America Corporation was formed through the merger of San Francisco-based Bank of America and Charlotte, N.C.-based NationsBank in 1998, creating one of the country's' largest banking organizations. Bank of America can trace its roots to the Bank of Italy, started by an Italian immigrant to serve his community in 1904. BofA launched the BankAmericard in 1958, which was the second universal credit card card ever offered, with Diners Club being the first. The card network behind the BankAmericard eventually evolved into Visa after being spun off from the bank in the 1970s. Bank of America dramatically grew its credit card portfolio when it acquired MBNA in 2004.
 
Bank of America issues Visa cards exclusively and does not issue cards on the Mastercard, American Express, or Discover networks. Its cards include points and cash-back rewards options for consumers and small business, along with cards for college students and those who want to transfer balances or build credit.
 
Bank of America generally requires excellent or good credit for the majority of its consumer and business cards, although it does consider those with no credit history for its student card options and those with lower scores for its non-rewards and secured card options.
 
Bank of America's rewards points are earned at various levels based on the card product. They can be redeemed in a number of ways: for cash back, statement credits, gift cards, or for travel through Bank of America's travel center. As with many issuers' rewards platforms, earned points generally have the greatest value when they're redeemed for travel through the travel portal.
 
Bank of America received a score of 798 out of 1,000 points in the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study, placing it in the middle tier of major national credit card issuers. The average score among major issuers was 806. Its mobile app was ranked highly for consumer satisfaction, scoring second in a 2020 J.D. Power survey. As another of its services, Bank of America offers customers access to their FICO credit score.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations so that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale, using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth. 
 
Once all of a card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for the card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, with travel rewards cards we apply significantly more weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
