
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Chase is the largest issuer of credit cards in the United States in terms of cards in circulation and outstanding balances and is considered one of the premier issuers of branded and co-branded credit cards. Given its broad selection of credit cards and its national banking footprint, it's not surprising that there are legions of people searching for the best Chase products online. To save our readers' time we’ve done extensive research to single out the best Chase cards based on the needs of individual consumers, students, and small-business owners.
 $200 cash back after you spend $500 on purchases in your first 3 months from account opening. Plus earn 5% cash back on grocery store purchases (not including Target or Walmart) on up to $12,000 spent in the first year. 
The Chase Freedom Unlimited is our choice for the best overall card from Chase, as well as the best cash back option, because of its robust rewards on all spending, reasonable interest rates, and solid customer service features. Freedom Unlimited also has no annual fee which makes it an easy card to keep for the long term as either a primary card in wallet or as a compliment to another rewards card that features bonus earnings on certain purchase categories. And now Freedom Unlimited allows you the opportunity to earn a $200 bonus after spending $500 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening along with the ability to earn 5% cash back on grocery store purchases (not including Target® or Walmart® purchases) on up to $12,000 in purchases in the first year. The card's ongoing rewards earning structure was also recently revamped, allowing cardmembers to earn 5% cash back on travel purchased through Chase, 3% on dining including takeout and drugstores, and 1.5% on all other purchases.
 50,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
We selected the Chase Sapphire Reserve card as the best Chase general travel rewards card because of its outstanding earnings bonuses for travel and dining, along with the 50% premium it offers when you redeem points for travel through Ultimate Rewards. There is a substantial annual fee of $550, but that can potentially justified if you use this as your primary card and for targeted spending in its bonus categories. While extensive travel is difficult to achieve in the current environment
 Earn 80,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. That's $1,000 when redeeming points for eligible purchases with the new Pay Yourself Back tool (currently, groceries, dining, home improvement and select charities), or for travel when you redeem through Chase Ultimate Rewards. 
The Chase Sapphire Preferred wins the award for best one-time bonus opportunity because it offers 80,000 Ultimate Rewards points after spending $4,000 in the first three months of account opening. Given that Ultimate Rewards points earned with this card get a 25% bonus if redeemed for travel through Chase, the bonus is potentially worth $1,000. The annual fee is $95, but that is very reasonable for such a versatile rewards card with bonus earnings on travel and dining.
 40,000 bonus miles after you spend $2,000 on purchases in the first 3 months your account is open. 
The United Explorer Card is the best Chase airline card based on the combination of its mileage earning structure, travel benefits, and the average value we calculate for United Miles, which is the highest of any domestic airline at 2.28 cents each. The $95 annual fee should be easy to justify with everyday spending, United purchases, and regular dining use.
 $50 Bonus earned after first purchase made within the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Chase Student Freedom card is our choice for best student card because of its flat cash back rewards program that offers 1% on all purchases along with an opportunity to earn a $20 bonus each year with on-time payments for up to five years. Access to FICO credit scores, credit education, and account management tools are also valuable features for college students searching for a first credit card. Student Freedom carries no annual fee.
 $500 bonus cash back after you spend $3,000 on purchases in the first 3 months after account opening. 
The Ink Business Unlimited card was selected as our best Chase business card because of its flat cash back earnings rate on all business purchases. As with its consumer sibling, Freedom Unlimited, the Ink Business Unlimited card presents the opportunity to generate significant cash back rewards by leveraging every dollar of purchases. And, rewards can be taken as cash back or transferred to another business or consumer Chase card that earns Chase Ultimate Rewards. Ink Business Unlimited charges no annual fee.
 Earn 5 Free Nights after you spend $5,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
We chose the Marriott Bonvoy Boundless card as the best Chase hotel card because of its outstanding rewards earning structure for Marriott purchases and a very respectable 2X points on all other purchases. We value Marriott points at 1.32 cents each, which provides an excellent rate of return on overall spending. The annual fee for Marriott Bonvoy Boundless is $95, but that can make sense for people who value Marriott points as their preferred rewards currency and use this as their primary card.
 
Chase credit cards are issued by Chase Bank, N.A., which itself is part of the retail banking arm of financial services behemoth J.P. Morgan Chase, the largest banking organization in the U.S. and sixth largest in the world. J.P. Morgan Chase has grown over time through the acquisition and merger of multiple large banking organizations, such as Bank One, Chemical Bank, and Washington Mutual in the past 20 years. The biggest of these was the merger of J.P. Morgan and Chase Manhattan Bank in 2000, which resulted in the company's new name and future branding.
 
Chase issues many rewards cards to consumers, students, and small business owners, with rewards that include both cash back and points. Its cards also provide options for cardholders wishing to transfer balances and manage spending. Chase has partnerships with numerous major airlines, hotels, and retail organizations and offers specialized rewards programs through co-branded credit cards. Partnerships include Amazon, Disney, Hyatt, Marriott, IHG, United Airlines, and Southwest Airlines.
 
Chase issues Visa and Mastercard network-branded cards but not American Express or Discover network-branded cards. It primarily offers rewards credit cards with cash back, generic travel points, and points tied to co-branded partner loyalty programs. It also offers several cards targeted to the small business community, along with a student credit card.
 
Chase generally requires excellent credit for most of its card products but does offer a few cards aimed at those with merely good credit. Chase does not offer cards for fair or bad credit and doesn't have a secured credit card.
 
Chase uses an in-house guideline to manage its card risk, called the 5/24 rule. It limits the number of new accounts an applicant can have opened in the past 24 months to less than five, so bear that limit in mind before you apply. This rule applies to any new credit card accounts, not just those with Chase.
 
Chase issues numerous cards that earn Ultimate Rewards, which can be redeemed for travel, gift cards, Amazon.com gift certificates, and Apple merchandise or transferred to Chase travel partner loyalty programs (like Hyatt, Marriott, and United Airlines), usually on a 1:1 basis. Chase’s premium travel card, Sapphire Reserve, offers a 50% premium on Ultimate Rewards points when they're redeemed for travel through the UR travel portal, while the Sapphire Preferred and Ink Preferred provide a 25% premium.  
 
The following Chase cards offer Ultimate Rewards:
 
For more details on Ultimate Rewards, please see our Ultimate Guide to Chase Ultimate Rewards.
 
Aside from Chase’s Ultimate Rewards program, the bank offers other rewards cards that include cash back (both flat-rate and ones with bonus cash back on quarterly rotating categories) and partner-based programs like airline, hotel, and retailer loyalty points.
 
Chase receives relatively good marks for its customer service and earned 807 out of 1,000 points in the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study. (The average score among major national issuers was 806.) Two other 2019 J.D. Power studies rank the bank’s online application and app above average. Chase offers online resources to help view and track credit reports and manage outstanding debt, along with access to FICO credit scores through its mobile app. 
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to make sure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth. 
 
Once all of a card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for the card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, with travel rewards cards we apply significantly more weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
