
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
You can use personal loans for a lot of different purposes. They can help you cover emergency expenses, finance a home improvement project, or even purchase a vehicle. Yet you might be surprised to learn that, with the right plan and some consistent follow-through, personal loans could potentially help you get out of debt faster.
 
With debt consolidation loans, you can pay off high-interest debts like credit cards. If your new loan features a lower interest rate than you were paying before, you could save money in interest fees. Below you'll find our complete list of the best personal loans for debt consolidation as well as information about how debt consolidation loans work and how they can impact your credit.
 
LightStream is the online lending division of SunTrust Bank. LightStream offers rates starting as low as 3.99% (with auto pay) on personal loans for debt consolidation. The rates will vary though by amount of loan and duration of the loan. 
 
If you qualify, the lender may let you borrow up to $100,000. When you add in the benefit of no fees, LightStream may be an affordable option to consolidate other high-interest debts.
 Rates as low as 3.99% on debt consolidation loans when signing up for auto pay No fees LightStream guarantees to beat any qualifying rate from another lender (restrictions apply) Good credit is recommended No pre-approvals—you must allow a hard inquiry of your credit report to check your rate 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: LightStream
 
The Payoff platform helps people who want to consolidate credit card debt find lenders that may be willing to help. Interest rates from Payoff Lending Partners start as low as 5.99%. You can borrow up to $40,000 if you qualify. Borrowers will also receive a free monthly update of their FICO Score.
 Borrow with a fair credit score (as low as 640), if you can satisfy other loan requirements Few fees apply. Loans include no application fee, prepayment penalty, late fee, or annual fee A soft credit inquiry allows you to check your rate online Limitations on how you use funds—consolidate credit cards and certain unsecured installment loans only Origination fees of up to 5% may apply Minimum rate increases to 6.99% if you need to borrow more than $15,000 
Other important information:
 
Avant, through its relationship with WebBank, offers and services personal loans for qualified borrowers. The company has issued over 800,000 loans since it was founded in 2012. 
 
Personal loans from Avant may be a good fit for middle-income borrowers who don’t have perfect credit histories. Rates start at 9.95% and climb up to 35.99%. That’s admittedly high compared with the APR range some other lenders offer. Yet bad credit borrowers could potentially save money with an Avant personal loan versus other high-rate financing options, like credit cards. 
 No prepayment penalties Avant performs a soft credit inquiry when you first check your loan rates and terms Easy-to-use app lets you manage your account on a mobile device APR is high compared to what you might qualify for somewhere else, if you have good credit Upfront administration fee (up to 4.75%) comes directly out of your loan Late fees and dishonest payment fees 
Other important information:
 
Best Egg is an online lending platform that helps borrowers find personal loans they can use to consolidate debt and for other purposes. The platform has funded over 600,000 loans (through FDIC-insured Cross River Bank) since it was founded in 2014. 
 
Fixed-rate loans with Best Egg start as low as 5.99%. Qualified borrowers may access up to $35,000 in funding. Best Egg has an A+ rating with the Better Business Bureau. The BBB also ranks Best Egg as a five-star company based on an analysis of over 2,695 customer reviews.
 A fair credit score (over 640) may be sufficient to qualify, but not at the lowest rates You can have two loans open at once with Best Egg A soft credit inquiry when you check your loan rate Charges an origination fee from 0.99% to 5.99% Low maximum loan amount compared with some other lenders (especially if you have good credit and high income) A credit score of 700 or higher and at least $100,000 in annual income is necessary to qualify for the lowest APR 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Best Egg
 
Marcus—an online branch of Goldman Sachs—offers high-yield savings accounts and personal loans. Loans go as high as $40,000 and there are no fees whatsoever.
 
APRs start at 6.99% and go up to 19.99%. You also have the option to change your due date if the one assigned to you doesn't work for you.
 Low APR starts at 6.99% for borrowers with excellent credit. No fees — not even late fees. Pre-qualification option available to see if you're eligible before applying. Autopay discount available. No co-signer option. At least high fair credit needed to qualify. 
Other important information:
 
For borrowers who prefer an in-person loan application experience, Wells Fargo offers assistance across the country at any of their 5,400 branches. As one the largest banks, applicants with good credit have access to flexible repayments terms starting at 12 months and competitive rates starting at 5.74%.
 Funding as soon as the next business day High maximum loan amount Discounts available on loan rates Hard credit inquiry only (this could affect your credit score) In-person applications only for new customers History of scandals 
Other important information:
 
Borrowers with lower credit scores will like that Rocket Loans offers fast funding—same day available—and competitive rates starting at 7.161% with autopay, although there is an origination fee. Part of the Quicken family of companies, applicants can prequalify for a loan through a soft credit pull. 
 Same day funding available Check initial rate without affecting your credit score Available for those with lower credit scores 1% to 6% origination fee Individual applications only Autopay discount smaller compared to other lenders 
Other important information:
 
Peerform is a peer-to-peer lending offering rates starting at 5.99% and origination fees starting at 1%—not exactly low for those who have excellent credit, but a viable choice for borrowers with fair credit scores. Applicants can take out loans as low as $4,000 and receive funding within a few business days. 
 Prequalification available No prepayment penalties when making extra payments or paying off remaining balance of loan Borrowers can qualify for a loan even with a short credit history Origination fees from 1% to 5% At $4,000, minimum loan amount is high No joint applications 
Other important information:
 
Debt consolidation is the process of combining several debts you already owe together into a single, new account. Once combined, you make one monthly payment to take care of your total credit obligation. 
 
The term debt consolidation can describe a few different approaches to combining debts, including:
 
With both approaches above, debt consolidation can roll several existing financial obligations into one. Ideally, with either option, your goal should be to obtain a lower interest rate and better terms.
 
In general, debt consolidation is limited to unsecured credit obligations. These may include credit cards, student loans, and unsecured installment loans you currently owe. Medical bills may also fit into this category. However, if you want to refinance a secured loan, like a mortgage, you’ll generally need to look at different financing options.
 
There are a few common ways to consolidate unsecured debts. The chart below features highlights and a comparison of two of the most popular debt consolidation options.
 
People commonly have two main questions when they consider debt consolidation options:
 
The first question can only be answered with research and rate shopping. Yet it's a bit easier to explain how debt consolidation may affect your credit.
 
Debt consolidation loans may be good for your credit scores, depending on the information on your credit reports. Credit scoring models, like FICO and VantageScore, pay close attention to the debt-to-limit ratio (aka credit utilization ratio) on your credit card accounts. When your credit reports show that you're using a larger percentage of your credit limits, your scores may suffer.
 
Installment accounts, like consolidation loans, don't receive the same treatment where credit scores are concerned. Imagine you owe $30,000 on an installment loan and $3,000 on a credit card with a $3,000 limit. Because the credit card is 100% utilized, it would likely impact your credit scores far more (and not in a good way) than the $30,000 installment account.
 
When you pay off revolving credit card debt with a debt consolidation loan, you may trigger a decrease in your credit utilization ratio. That reduction in credit utilization could result in a credit score increase. Additionally, your credit scores can be impacted by the number of accounts with balances on your credit report—the fewer, the better. When you use a new loan to pay off multiple accounts at once, it could potentially give your credit scores a small boost.
 
Opening a new credit card and using a balance transfer to pay off existing credit card debt may also lower your credit utilization ratio. However, a balance transfer card is still a revolving account. A debt consolidation loan might reduce your utilization ratio to 0% (if you paid off all of your credit card balances). A balance transfer to a new credit card won't have the same effect.
 
So, a credit card balance transfer could potentially improve your credit scores. But in general, paying off revolving credit cards with an installment account (aka a debt consolidation loan) has a chance to improve your scores more.
 
Here are a few signs that consolidating your debt might be a smart financial move.
 
Only you can decide if debt consolidation is the right choice for your current financial situation. But considering some of the pros and cons of debt consolidation may make your decision a little easier.
 Debt consolidation could reduce the amount of money you pay in interest. The average rate on an interest-assessing credit card is 16.97%. Meanwhile, the average interest rate on a 24-month personal loan is 10.21%, according to the Federal Reserve.  Consolidating your debt might improve your credit. When you reduce your credit utilization ratio and the number of accounts with balances on your credit reports, your credit scores might benefit.