
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Discover, like American Express, is both a credit card network and an issuer of credit cards. (Visa and Mastercard are strictly card networks and don't issue cards directly to the public.) Discover is the newest of the four major card networks in the U.S. and has grown to become the sixth largest card issuer based on cards in circulation and balances outstanding. We have researched the most popular Discover cards to select the best in categories including cash-back rewards, travel miles, balance transfer, student, and secured cards.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Miles card is our pick for the best overall Discover card and best travel rewards option due to its earning potential over the course of a year, outpacing all the other consumer cards in Discover's lineup. Its generous miles earning structure across all spending categories can deliver significant value with normal spending. Redemption can take the form of statement credits for travel expenses or simply cash back.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
We chose the Discover it Business card as the best business card because of its flat cash-back earning structure on all business expenditures, which delivers solid value to small businesses. Discover's business card offers the same cash-back match as its consumer cards, enabling business owners to double their cash back in the first year. Also like Discover's consumer cards, there is no annual fee for the Discover it Business card.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Cash Back card is Investopedia's choice for best cash-back card due to its generous 5% cash-back earning structure on spending categories that rotate each quarter, with a base rate of cash back on all other spending. There is a cap of $1,500 on eligible spending in the bonus categories each quarter, but the earnings can add up since they cover popular types of spending such as gasoline and restaurants and large online merchants like Amazon. For cardholders willing to stay on top of the bonus opportunities, the potential earnings can be significant.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Chrome card is the obvious choice for the Discover card that offers the best rewards earnings for gasoline and restaurant spending since its reward structure is purpose-built to favor those popular spending categories. Discover's cash-back match on first year earnings further sweetens the deal on this no-annual-fee card meant for foodies and frequent drivers
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
The Discover it Student Cash Back card is our pick for best student option from Discover because of its enhanced cash back on the same popular rotating spending categories as the standard consumer version of the card (with the same $1,500 cap on eligible spending), and then a base rate of earnings on all other spending. The cash-back match then doubles all the cash back earned in the first year, making this a great rewards value for students. The lack of an annual fee also makes this a student-friendly option.
 Discover will match all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year, automatically. 
We selected the Discover it Secured card as the best card option from Discover for consumers with no credit or bad credit, as it considers applicants with those credit profiles and its security deposit requirement starts as low as $200. With on-time payments, Discover will automatically review accounts for eligibility to graduate to a non-secured card in as little as eight months.
 
Discover was launched in 1985 and made its public debut in a Super Bowl commercial in early 1986. It is both a card network and a direct issuer of cards to consumers through Discover Bank, formerly Greenwood Trust Company. The Discover network ranks fourth in terms of dollar volume of processing and merchant acceptance, behind Visa, Mastercard, and American Express, and sixth in terms of cards issued. Discover was originally owned by Sears, Roebuck and Company (the largest retailer in the world at that time) and was part of the Sears Financial Network that also included Dean Witter Reynolds and Coldwell Banker as its brokerage and real-estate arms. Discover disrupted the card industry by issuing no-annual-fee cards and offering higher than normal credit lines. It later introduced its innovative Cashback rewards program, which was novel for its time.
 
Discover issues cards exclusively on its network-branded platform and doesn't issue Visa, Mastercard, or American Express network-branded cards. Discover primarily issues cash-back rewards cards to consumers, students, and small-business owners. It also offers a secured card product for those with lower credit scores or no credit history.
 
Discover generally requires good or better credit for its card products but also offers a few cards for those with little credit history, such as students. 
 
Discover offers cards that primarily earn cash back but also one that offers generic airline miles (Discover it Miles). Discover's Cashback rewards program provides a percentage back on all purchases, with 5% cash back on rotating spending categories and merchants on eligible spending up to $1,500 each quarter (with 1% after that) and 1% on all other spending.
 
The following Discover cards earn those Cashback rewards:
 
Several other Discover cards have a different cash-back rewards structure. The Discover it Chrome and Chrome Student cards offer 2% cash back on restaurant and gas purchases and 1% on other spending. The Discover it Business card offers unlimited 1.5% cash back on all purchases.
 
Discover received top marks for its customer service, scoring 842 out of 1,000 points, in the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study, putting it first among national card issuers. The average score was 806. Discover has held this top spot for several years and features it in its national television advertising.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on nearly 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure that our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees, and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations so that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits, and security/customer service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a prescribed formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like: If bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499, then 4; and so forth. 
 
Once all of a card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for the card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That lets us objectively identify cards that stand out in their category and indicate why they do. For example, with travel rewards cards we apply significantly more weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards is the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
