
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Recreational vehicles (RVs) are enormously popular. According to the RV Industry Association, 11 million U.S. households own an RV, spending on average three to four weeks per year in their vehicle. However, an RV can be a significant investment. A new folding camp trailer can cost as much as $22,000, while a new Type A motor home can cost a staggering $500,000.﻿﻿
 
If you spend that much money on a camper, trailer, or motor home, RV insurance can provide you with essential protection against damage and theft. In most states RV insurance is required by law, but you may want to purchase more than the state-mandated minimums to make sure you have adequate coverage for all of your valuables.
 
To help you select an insurer, we looked at 15 top RV insurance companies. We picked the seven best companies based on their coverage options, available discounts, and industry reputations.
 
Nationwide is a well-known insurer that offers a wide range of insurance products. Its RV insurance coverage options include liability, collision, and comprehensive coverage, and it covers motor homes, travel trailers, and campers. With multiple policy options and a lengthy list of discounts, Nationwide is our pick for the best overall RV insurance company, because it allows you to customize a policy at an affordable rate.
 Customizable coverage options Coverage for different RV classes Several policy discounts available No online quotes Loss assessment fees not covered No pet injury coverage 
Nationwide sold its first insurance policy in 1926. Since then it’s become one of the largest insurance companies in the U.S. and a Fortune 100 company.﻿﻿ It has an A+ rating from AM Best, the credit rating agency that specializes in the insurance industry.﻿﻿
 
Nationwide’s basic RV insurance covers:
 
When you purchase a policy, you can add the following optional coverages:
 
Unfortunately, Nationwide does not have a loss assessment coverage option, which some insurers offer to cover fees or charges from RV associations in case of damage. It also doesn’t offer pet injury coverage if your dog or cat is injured in an accident. As many RV owners travel with their pets, that’s a significant drawback.
 
Nationwide does have a long list of discounts to reduce your premium costs, including multiple policy discounts, good driver discounts, and more. You cannot get an online quote. You must contact a Nationwide agent to get pricing information and to purchase a policy.
 
With Allstate you can qualify for multiple policy discounts when you bundle your insurance policies together. Allstate offers auto, homeowners, renter’s, motorcycle, and life insurance, so you can package your RV insurance with other coverage to save money.
 Discounts for transferring policies and 55 and retired Rental reimbursement coverage available Coverage specifically for your RV sound system No safe driver discounts No full-timer or vacation-specific policies Must get quotes through an agent 
Allstate has been in operation since 1931 and now serves more than 16 million households.﻿﻿ The company’s RV insurance has the following coverage:
 
Allstate’s RV insurance will cover your RV’s manufacturer-installed sound system. If it’s damaged in an accident or stolen, your insurance will cover up to $2,500 to repair or replace it, minus your deductible.
 
The policy also includes rental reimbursement coverage. If your motor home is damaged related to your comprehensive or collision coverage, your rental reimbursement coverage will pay for you to rent a motor home or an automobile in its place.
 
While Allstate does have discounts for bundling policies, transferring RV insurance from other companies, and for policyholders 55 and older, it does not have a safe driver discount. It also doesn’t have full-timer or vacation-specific coverage options, and you must get a quote through an agent.
 
Allstate has an A+ rating from AM Best.﻿﻿
 
Of all of the companies we looked at, National General has the most robust list of available discounts. According to the company, people who switch to National General save $389 per year on average.﻿﻿
 Multiple discounts available Online quote available Customizable coverage options Coverage not available in Hawaii or Massachusetts Far high-than-average number of customer complaints Not all RV classes are covered 
National General’s discounts include:
 
You can get a quote online or by calling an agent. National General has customizable coverage options, so you can design a policy to meet your unique needs.
 
Coverage isn’t available in all states; residents in Hawaii and Massachusetts are not eligible. The company doesn’t cover all RV classes, so your vehicle may not qualify for coverage.
 
National General has an A- rating from AM Best.﻿﻿ However, the company has received a significant number of customer complaints. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners maintains a database of complaints received about all insurance companies and compares the number of complaints received about each company to the company’s market share. As of 2019, National General had a far higher-than-typical number of complaints relative to its size.﻿﻿
 
If you intend to drive your RV into Mexico during your vacation, it’s important to know that you’ll need additional insurance coverage, as most RV insurance policies only cover you within 25 miles of the border and for no more than 10 days.﻿﻿ With Good Sam Insurance Agency, you can get the necessary coverage for your trip. Whether you’ll be in Mexico for a weekend or several months, you can get a customized policy to suit your budget.
 Online quotes available Get a specific Mexico policy or add other coverage Coverage for all classes of RVs Not a direct insurer Multiple customer complaints about roadside assistance Insurer-dependent coverage and service 
Good Sam is not a direct insurer. Instead, it is an insurance agency that connects you with insurance companies offering RV policies. It partners with MexicoInsuranceOnline.com to also offer specialty Mexico travel policies.
 
You can get an online quote and purchase a policy just for your trip to Mexico, or you can add a general RV policy. Good Sam Insurance Agency has coverage for all classes of RVs. Because Good Sam works with other insurance companies, the quality of customer service and coverage options can vary from company to company.
 
Roadside assistance has to be purchased as a separate policy. However, many customers have complained about Good Sam’s roadside assistance coverage with the Better Business Bureau. Customers cited long wait times, not being able to get service on Sundays, and high fees for services provided.﻿﻿
 
We chose Progressive for full-time RV travelers because it has a specific full-timer’s liability policy for people who use their RV as their permanent residence. With full-timer’s liability coverage you have broader protection, including personal liability, medical payments, and loss assessment coverages.
 Offers a specialty full-timer’s liability policy Multiple discounts available Customizable coverage Discounts not available in all states Varying prices based on how you buy your policy Basic liability coverage excludes travel trailers 
Progressive was founded in 1937. Since then it has become a large insurance company, with more than 20.4 million policies in force.﻿﻿
 
Progressive has customizable RV insurance options, with coverage starting at just $125 per year. Under its standard coverages, it offers:
 
It has several additional coverages you can add to your policy, including full-timer’s liability. With it, you’re covered up to a specific limit if you’re responsible for injuries in and around your RV. If you use your RV as a permanent residence, this is an option you should consider adding to your insurance policy for added protection.
 
While Progressive does offer several discounts, not all of them are available in all states. Your policy’s pricing is also dependent on how you purchase it. Your quote may be different if you purchase over the phone, online, or through an independent agent.
 
Progressive has an A+ rating from AM Best.﻿﻿
 
We selected Safeco as the best insurer for weekend warriors and part-time travelers because it specializes in RV insurance for people who use their RVs for fewer than 250 days per year. It has customizable options and covers Class A motor homes, travel trailers, fifth wheels, pop-up campers, and camper vans.
 Specializes in coverage for RVs used less than 250 days per year Wide range of optional coverages available Multiple discounts Not all coverage options available in all states No online quotes No full-timer coverage 
Safeco is a subsidiary of Liberty Mutual, a Fortune 100 company with an A rating from AM Best.﻿﻿ It offers RV insurance to people who use their vehicles for fewer than 250 days per year. While all of its coverage options aren’t available in all states, it offers:
 
It also has a wide range of optional coverages you can add to your policy, such as protection for your pet, electronic lock or key replacement, and loan or lease protection.
 
You can qualify for multiple discounts. If you take an accident prevention course, install an anti-theft device in your RV, or store your RV during the winter, you can get a premium reduction. Coverage for RV full-timers is not available, and you must contact a Safeco insurance agent to get a quote for a policy.
 
The Hartford partners with AARP to provide RV insurance through its AARP Auto Insurance and Homeowners Insurance Program. With strong rankings in J.D. Power’s Home Insurance and Auto Claims Satisfaction Studies, the Hartford is our choice as the best RV insurer for customer service.
 High rankings from J.D. Power Online quotes available Discounts for bundling policies Only available to AARP members in most areas No specific coverage for full-timers No storage discount 
The Hartford was founded in 1810 and is the only nationally endorsed auto and home insurance program for AARP’s 37 million members.﻿﻿ The Hartford partnered with AARP to offer RV insurance for motor homes, travel trailers, and campers. It has the following coverage options:
 
The Hartford’s RV coverage is only available to AARP members in most states, and it doesn’t have specific coverage options for full-time RV travelers.
 
When it comes to customer service, Hartford has an excellent reputation. Its RV insurance falls within its auto and homeowners' insurance program. In J.D. Power’s 2019 Auto Claims Satisfaction Study, the Hartford was ranked sixth out of 23 insurers, with an “about average” rating.﻿﻿ In the J.D. Power 2019 Home Insurance Study, the company was ranked 13th out of 24 national insurance companies, also with an “about average” rating.﻿﻿ The Hartford has an A+ rating from AM Best.﻿﻿
 
Because an RV is a vehicle and may be a temporary or even permanent home, it blends aspects of auto insurance and homeowners insurance policies. Instead of using your current auto or homeowners insurance coverage, you typically need specialized RV insurance that includes the following:﻿﻿
 
In some cases, particularly if you plan on spending a significant amount of time in your RV or making it your full-time residence, you may need additional coverage. Many insurers allow you to customize your policy and add some or all of the following options:
 
While a custom RV policy usually provides more coverage than you’d get with an auto policy, the cost is similar. How much you’ll pay for RV insurance is dependent on your location, the type of RV you’re insuring, if your RV is for full-time or part-time use, your driving record, and the coverage and option you include in your policy.
 
Generally, you can expect to pay $500 to $1,000 per year in insurance premiums for Class B motor homes, the smallest and least expensive RVs. Class A motor homes, the largest and most expensive type of RV, will typically cost $1,000 to $4,000 per year to insure.﻿﻿
 
Many different companies offer RV insurance, including:
 
To protect your investment, getting adequate RV insurance is important. Make sure you research the minimum coverage requirements in your state and get multiple quotes from different insurance companies to ensure that you get the best rates on your RV insurance policy.
 
To choose the seven best RV insurance providers, we researched 15 well-known companies offering RV insurance policies. We evaluated each insurer based on the coverage options it offered, what states it was licensed in, available discounts, its AM Best Rating, and its J.D. Power customer satisfaction study rankings.
 RV Industry Association. "Media Resources." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Nationwide. "About Us." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Nationwide. "Company Ratings." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Allstate. "Newsroom." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Businesswire. "AM Best Affirms Credit Ratings of The Allstate Corporation and Its Key Subsidiaries." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. National General. "Smart Discounts." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. AM Best. "National General Insurance Company." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. National Association of Insurance Commissioners. "National General Insurance Company Complaint Index." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Farmers. "Will I Be Covered If I Travel to Mexico or Canada in My RV?" Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Better Business Bureau. "Good Sam Enterprises." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Progressive. "About Us." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Progressive. "Auto Insurance Ratings." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020. Safeco. "About Safeco." Accessed Aug. 8, 2020.