
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The best Capital One credit cards provide compelling cash back, points or miles, with consumer-friendly terms like no annual fees (or annual fees that are easily justified based on rewards), introductory interest rates and one-time bonuses. Capital One offers cards for multiple market segments, offering rewards for consumers and small business owners interested in travel or cash back redemptions. We have reviewed Capital One’s most popular consumer and business credit cards and have chosen the ones below as the best for various categories depending on your needs.
 Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One Quicksilver Cash Rewards card is our choice for best overall Capital One card as well as best card for cash back rewards because of it scored highest across multiple attributes in our methodology that considers rewards, fees, interest, benefits, customer service and security. It's simple but robust 1.5% cash back structure is among the best in the industry.
 Earn a one-time $200 cash bonus once you spend $500 on purchases within the first 3 months from account opening. 
We chose the Capital One SavorOne Cash Rewards card as the best dining card from Capital One because of its 3% cash back earnings at restaurants coupled with its no annual fee. While its sibling, the Capital One Savor, has a slightly higher earning rate on dining we like the fact this card has most of the benefit without the yearly cover charge. Like all Capital One cards SavorOne has charges no foreign transaction fees, which can make it an ideal card for dining on vacations as well.
 Earn 20,000 miles once you spend $1,000 on purchases within the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One VentureOne Rewards card is Investopedia's choice for best Capital One travel card due to its 20,000 mile bonus and 1.25 mile per dollar ongoing earnings structure that rewards all spending. Capital One miles are quite flexible when redeemed for travel through the Capital One Travel Center or transferred through its alliance of airline and travel partners. No annual fee and no foreign transaction fees add to this card's suitability as an ideal travel companion.
 Earn $500 when you spend $4,500 in the first 3 months of account opening. 
Our pick for best Capital One card for business rewards is the Capital One Spark Cash for Business card, as it offers an enhanced earning rate of 2% cash back on all purchases and not just certain business-related categories. Capital One offers many card options for small business owners but we feel like this is the best among those in terms of solid return on spending offered with no annual fee the first year, then $95.
 
The QuicksilverOne Cash Rewards Card is our pick for the best Capital One card option for those with fair credit. It offers the same flat rate cash back as Quicksilver but is designed for those with less than good or excellent credit. QuicksilverOne comes a $39 annual fee, which can be easily justified with consistent use. Cash back rewards is a relatively unusual feature for a card in the fair credit segment, and combined with low fees makes this card a solid choice for those in the middle of the credit band.
 
The Journey Student Rewards Card from Capital One is our pick for best student card as it provides students with cash back on every purchase dollar along with an incentive for on-time payments in the form of a 25% boost in earnings each month. Journey Student Rewards also offers solid credit education, account management and security tools for college students starting out with credit.
 
We chose the Capital One Secured Mastercard as the best Capital One option for those with bad or no credit as it is an obvious choice given its broad acceptance for those who can place a security deposit with the issuer in exchange for a credit line. There is no rewards program with this card but there is also no annual fee and no foreign transaction fees, which makes it an easy card to keep and build credit over time with responsible use.
 
Capital One’s origins were as the credit card division of Signet, a regional bank in the mid-atlantic region of the US that was spun off as an independent organization in 1994. It was one of the original “monoline” banks, as they were known at the time because they only had one product line - credit cards. Other monoline banks of the time included MBNA and First USA, which are now owned by Bank of America and Chase, respectively. Capital One is the last of these types of independent card issuers, though they have since branched out into other types of consumer loans and deposits delivered online and through a nationwide network of banking locations, including Capital One Cafes. Capital One is currently ranked as the fifth largest credit card issuer based on outstanding balances, which total nearly $100 billion.
 
Capital One issues both Mastercard and Visa network-branded cards to consumers, students and small businesses. Travel-related versions of these cards can come in premium form as World Mastercard, World Elite Mastercard, Visa Platinum and Visa Signature. Capital One also offers cards on a co-branded basis with fortune 50 companies like Walmart and General Motors that provide rewards specific to patrons of those brands.
 
Capital One products are generally targeted to those with good to excellent credit but there are also options for those with fair credit or those who are initially building their credit.
 
Capital One credit card rewards are based on generic travel miles that can be used to book travel on any airline or with any hotel or a percentage of cash back that can be earned on every purchase dollar. The amount or percentage of the rewards earned per dollar varies depending on the card. Finding the right card can come down to how you wish to receive your rewards - either in the form of immediate cash back or in mileage currency that can be used to pay for future travel. It’s also important to gauge how much you spend on credit cards, where you spend and whether you’re willing to pay an annual fee in return for enhanced earnings opportunities.
 
These cards allow you to earn cash-back with your everyday and, in some cases, with bonus category spending, that can be redeemed for checks or statement credits for any amount that has been earned (i.e. there are no minimum redemption thresholds):
 
These Capital One cards provide various flat-rate and bonus earnings opportunities.  
 
The travel rewards Capital One cards earn “miles”, which are not tied to any particular airline. Each mile has a worth of one cent when redeemed toward travel expenses. Redemption can take the form of booking any travel through Capital One’s Rewards Center or can be used retroactively to offset a previously incurred travel expense through Capital One’s Purchase Eraser feature. The only caveat to using Purchase Eraser to offset travel expenses is that it must be done within 90 days of the original purchase. Other redemption options include statement credits or Amazon gift cards, though the redemption value of each mile is considerably less vs. redeeming toward travel.
 
A valuable feature of Capital One’s travel rewards cards is that they allow transfer to a number of airline frequent flyer programs as well as a few large hotel chain loyalty programs that have partnered with Capital One, listed below:
 
Bear in mind that Capital One travel partners involve a diluted transfer value, with most converting at 1.5 miles or points for every 2 Capital One miles. Three partners - Singapore Airlines, Emirates and Accor hotels transfers at a rate of 1 mile or point per 2 Capital One Miles.
 
Capital One offers a number of cards without annual fees and their interest rates, while based on creditworthiness, are generally considered reasonable relative to other issuers’ products in the market. One notable feature is that Capital One waives foreign transaction fees on all of their cards, which is a very consumer-friendly policy. 
 
Capital One earned an “average” rating in J.D. Power’s 2019 U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study, putting them squarely in the middle of the pack.
 
Potentially, as Capital One offers a secured credit card option for those with bad credit or no credit history. Secured cards require a security deposit to be placed with the issuer in exchange for a credit limit of the same or sometimes greater amount.
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
