
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
There are many reasons why you might prefer to search for a personal loan online instead of with traditional banks and credit unions. Online lenders may approve borrowers with a wide variety of credit scores. Some may offer flexible loan amounts, both large and small, depending on your borrowing needs. Online lenders can often offer fast funding solutions when you need access to cash in a hurry.
 
Searching for a personal loan online can often make for an easier rate-shopping experience as well. You can easily consider multiple loan offers side by side, from the comfort of your home. Perhaps best of all, many online lenders often offer a prequalification process, helping you make loan comparisons without risking damage to your credit score.
 
LightStream is the online lending division of Truist Bank (a merger between SunTrust and BB&T). According to LightStream, its goal is to offer a simple online loan experience and excellent interest rates to consumers with good credit.
 
Low rates and no fees make LightStream stand out among the competition. Its interest rates start as low as 3.99% on certain types of personal loans, and it offers loan amounts as high as $100,000 to well-qualified borrowers.
 Competitive APRs Loans available for many purposes Low maximum interest rate Need good to excellent credit No prequalification available Difficult principal-only payments 
Competitive APRs – Lightstream’s interest rates range between 3.99% to 19.99% annual percentage rates (APRs), which is competitive in the market, and you get a 0.50% rate decrease if you enroll in the autopay program.
 
Loans available for many purposes – You can use your loan for a myriad of purposes, including debt consolidation, home improvement, medical bills, buying a car, funding a wedding, and more.
 
Low maximum interest rate – At 19.99%, the maximum interest rate is considerably lower than what some lenders charge.
 
Need good to excellent credit – LightStream doesn’t specify its minimum credit score requirement online, but it’s reported to be 660, with several years of established credit history also required.
 
No prequalification available – You can’t see what rates you might qualify for through a soft credit inquiry. Instead, you must agree to a hard inquiry, which could temporarily diminish your credit score, to check rates and apply for financing.
 
Difficult principal-only payments – You must schedule payments on your exact due date for extra funds to be applied to principal.
 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: LightStream
 
The SoFi platform offers a variety of online financing options, including personal loans, student loans, and mortgages. SoFi personal loans may work well for borrowers with good credit ratings.
 
Interest rates on SoFi personal loans start at 5.99%. Applicants with good credit and sufficient income who can satisfy SoFi’s conditions may be able to borrow as much as $100,000. 
 Competitive interest rates Prequalification available Flexible monthly due date Need good to excellent credit Lower interest rates elsewhere Slow funding process 
Competitive interest rates – Well-qualified borrowers can get an APR as low as 5.99%, and there is a 0.25% discount for enrolling in autopay.
 
Prequalification available – You can check what rates and terms you may qualify for through a soft credit inquiry that won’t affect your credit score.
 
Flexible monthly due date – You can change your monthly due date (once) to any date between the first and the 25th of the month.
 
Need good to excellent credit – SoFi doesn’t specify a required credit score, but it is reported to be 680, and a strong credit history is also needed.
 
Lower interest rates elsewhere – Borrowers with excellent credit will find lower APRs available to them from other lenders.
 
Slow funding process – Once you e-sign your loan agreement, you must wait for a confirmation call, after which it can take several days to get your funds.
 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: SoFi
 
Upstart is an online lending platform that works with several different lending partners. The platform uses artificial intelligence and alternative data to help find affordable personal loans for borrowers with fair or better credit ratings. 
 
In addition to your credit score, your education, area of study, and job history might help you land a lower interest rate on your loan—possibly as low as 7.98%. According to Upstart, its rates are 16% lower than traditional lenders. Qualified applicants may be able to borrow up to $50,000.
 Next day funding Low loan amounts available Prequalification available High origination fees High average APR Low maximum loan amount 
Next day funding – Once they’ve signed their loan documents, 99% of Upstart borrowers get their money within 24 hours.
 
Low loan amounts available – Most people won’t have to borrow more than they need due to Upstart’s minimum loan amount of $1,000.
 
Prequalification available – As with SoFi, you can check what rates and terms you may qualify for through a soft credit inquiry that won’t affect your credit score.
 
High origination fees – Though they can start as low as 0%, origination fees can go as high as 8%.
 
High average APR – The average APR for three-year loans is 15%.
 
Low maximum loan amount – The most you can borrow is $50,000, which is low compared with some other lenders.
 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Upstart 
 
Getting a personal loan, online or otherwise, may not be easy when you have bad credit. Nevertheless, you have options. One of the most competitive online lenders for bad credit is Avant.
 
Founded in 2012, Avant offers online loans to borrowers with credit scores as low as 600. Qualified applicants may receive up to $35,000 in funding, with interest rates starting at 9.95%.
 Easy online application Competitive starting APR Receive funds quickly Prequalification available High maximum APR Hefty administrative fee Uncompetitive rates for some Low maximum loan amount 
Easy online application – You can complete the process in mere minutes.
 
Competitive starting APR – At 9.95%, Avant does well compared with other subprime lenders, though you could pay more depending on your credit score and other qualifying factors.
 
Receive funds quickly – Many borrowers get their funds as soon as the next business day.
 
Prequalification available – As with SoFi and Upstart, you can check what rates and terms you may qualify for through a soft credit inquiry that won’t affect your credit score.
 
High maximum APR – At 35.99%, it’s higher than that of many competitors.
 
Hefty administrative fee – It can go as high as 4.75%, and it may come directly out of your loan proceeds.
 
Uncompetitive rates for some – If you have a good or better credit score, you can likely find lower interest rates with other lenders.
 
Low maximum loan amount – At $40,000, it’s low compared with other online lenders.
 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Avant
 
Payoff is an online loan platform that helps people who are looking to pay off high-interest debt. The platform matches applicants with lending partners that offer interest rates as low as 5.99%. Compared with an average credit card interest rate of 15.78% (as of May 2020, according to the Federal Reserve), well-qualified borrowers may be able to save a bundle.﻿﻿
 Qualify with a fair credit score Potential to build credit Prequalification available Only for debt consolidation Slow funding process High minimum APRs 
Qualify with a fair credit score – You may be able to qualify with a credit score of 640.
 
Potential to build credit – If you manage your loan well, you can build your credit with the three main U.S. credit bureaus: Equifax, TransUnion, and Experian.
 
Prequalification available – As with all the lenders reviewed here but Lightstream, you can check what rates and terms you may qualify for through a soft credit inquiry that won’t affect your credit score.
 
Only for debt consolidation – You can only use your loan proceeds to consolidate debts, such as credit cards and some unsecured installment loans.
 
Slow funding process – Loans are funded within two to five business days after you complete the verification process, which is slow compared with other lenders.
 
High minimum APRs – For loans of more than $15,000, APRs start at 6.99% and can be even higher depending on your credit history and other factors.
 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Payoff 
 
Using a personal loan to try to get out of debt faster or to increase the value of your home can be a smart financial move. A personal loan can also be a lifeline when you have unexpected expenses and don’t have an emergency fund to cover costs. 
 
However, sometimes a personal loan may hurt you financially instead of improving your situation. Before you apply for a new loan, consider both the benefits and drawbacks you could face. 
 
If you want to borrow money and are confident that you can afford the new debt, it’s time to start searching for the right loan. Thankfully, comparing online loans tends to be a quicker, easier process than comparing loans from traditional financial institutions. 
 
Before you apply for any type of loan, it’s important to check and review your credit reports and scores with all three credit bureaus. Next, search for lenders that offer loans to people with your credit rating (excellent, good, fair, bad, etc.). You should make sure the lenders you’re considering offer the type of online loan you need (consolidation loan, home improvement loan, medical loan, etc.). Finally, compare available rates and fees and choose your top three lenders as you prepare to begin the application process. 
 
It’s not difficult to find a safe, online loan through a reputable online lender. Still, it is important to do your homework to make sure you’re dealing with a legitimate lender before you provide your personal information. Search for reviews of the best online lenders. It’s also helpful to look up any complaints lenders have received with various agencies, such as the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.﻿﻿ 
 
Finding an online loan (or any type of financing) with bad credit can be difficult. If you’re searching for bad-credit loans, you may find lenders that advertise “no credit check loans” or “guaranteed approval.” Any such promises should be a red flag. According to the Federal Trade Commission, a lender that isn’t interested in your credit score or history might be running an advance-fee loan scam.﻿﻿ 
 
Though whether or not you can apply for a joint loan with a cosigner is up to each individual lender, there are plenty that do allow joint loan applications. Keep in mind, however, that just because you’re allowed to apply for a loan with a cosigner doesn’t mean you should do so. Cosigning involves significant risk for your friend or loved one. As a cosigner, that person will be equally liable for the debt, just as much as the primary borrower. 
 
Should anything go wrong, late payments or a default could cause severe damage to both of your finances and credit reports, not to mention your relationship. Consider these risks carefully before you ask someone to cosign. 
 
Many online lenders offer instant approval (if you can qualify) when you apply for financing. However, an instant loan approval isn’t the same as instant access to your loan proceeds.
