
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
We've spent thousands of hours analyzing travel credit cards in order to identify the best cards for a range of needs and objectives. The best travel rewards credit cards provide significant benefits that make trips more convenient and enjoyable. This list represents our top rated travel cards across a number of categories, all driven by our rating methodology, comprehensive card database and proprietary points valuation models. We focus on highlighting the best cards possible and do not give any preference to cards from which we receive compensation. These are the cards we'd recommend to our family and friends, and they're the same ones we're recommending to you.
 The impact of the novel coronavirus pandemic on the global economy and travel may influence your perspective on whether it's the right time for you to apply for a travel credit card. Over the long term, we still expect these cards to deliver solid value and be worthy of consideration. 50,000 bonus points after you spend $4,000 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Chase Sapphire Reserve is our best overall travel card because of its competitive one-time point bonus, annual travel credit, high rewards earning rate, the fact that points are worth 50% more if you redeem them for travel through the Chase Ultimate Rewards portal, and the ability to transfer points on a 1:1 basis to eligible hotel and airline partners. While the annual fee is high, if you're an avid traveler the annual travel credit can help justify it and it has numerous other travel-related benefits that make this the best card for travel if you're not ready to commit yourself to a single airline or hotel. In the short term if you didn't want to save your points for travel, you could use them towards a statement credit.
 40,000 bonus miles after you spend $2,000 on purchases in the first 3 months your account is open. 
Based on our analysis, the United Explorer offers the highest value per mile earned of any airline credit card, and miles can be redeemed in multiple ways, including for flights with participating member airlines in its Star Alliance, one of the largest global airline partnerships. As with our best hotel card, you'd need to be committed to United as the airline you'll primarily fly with in order to extract the maximum benefit from the card. The compelling introductory bonus of the card really adds to the value of the card because of the high value placed on redeeming those points with United. The $95 annual fee is in line with its competitors and is waived the first year. The card does not charge foreign-transaction fees which helps make it a good choice for international travel.
 Earn up to 125,000 Marriott Bonvoy points. Earn 100,000 bonus points after you spend $5,000 in purchases on your new Card in your first 3 months. Plus, earn an additional 25,000 bonus points after your first anniversary of Card Membership. Offer Expires 1/13/2021. 
The Marriott Bonvoy Brilliant is our best for hotels because of its large one-time bonus coupled with a rewards earning and redemption value rate that is best in class. Although it has a high annual fee, you can partially justify it through the annual credit of $300 for Marriott purchases and an anniversary night. If you're going to pick this card, you definitely need to be ready to commit to Marriott being the hotel chain that will get your business so that you can extract the maximum value from the card. The complimentary Gold Elite Status with Marriott that comes with the card is a nice added benefit.
 Earn 100,000 bonus miles when you spend $20,000 on purchases in the first 12 months from account opening, or still earn 50,000 miles if you spend $3,000 on purchases in the first 3 months. 
The Capital One Venture offers exceptional yet simple rewards and flexible redemptions. Those pluses readily make up for its $95 annual fee. It offers an unlimited 2 miles per dollar on every purchase and an excellent one-time bonus of 100,000 after spending $20,000 in the first three months or 50,000 miles after spending $3,000 within the first three months.
 Earn 60,000 Membership Rewards® Points after you use your new Card to make $5,000 in purchases in your first 3 months. 
The Platinum Card from American Express is our pick for the best premium travel benefits because it offers some that you just won't find in another card. You get access to 100-plus American Express Global Lounges, credits for incidental airline fees, and credits for Uber and Saks Fifth Avenue. It also offers a very high 5-points-per-dollar rewards for flights booked through Amex’s travel portal or directly with airlines. The $550 annual fee is substantial even for an ultra-premium rewards card, but the expense can be justified by the card’s rewards, complimentary airport lounge access, Uber credits, and breaks on airline incidental fees if you make sure to use them all to their maximum benefit.
 Earn 50,000 miles when you spend $4,500 in the first 3 months of account opening. 
The Capital One Spark Miles for Business card is our choice for best business travel because it offers a simple and generous 2X miles on every purchase, regardless of spending category. And, with no annual fee the first year its's an easy card to test drive for even the smallest of business entities. By leveraging business expenses this card should enable small business owners to fund future business or personal travel without having to dip into their petty cash.
 Earn 20,000 miles once you spend $1,000 on purchases within the first 3 months from account opening. 
The Capital One VentureOne card is our choice for the best travel rewards card with no annual fee because it offers a flat-rate earning structure for all spending and the flexibility of Capital One's miles. These miles can be redeemed for travel on any airline without blackout dates - which presents an excellent value for a card with no annual fee. VentureOne also charges no foreign transaction fees, making it an ideal and inexpensive travel card.
 
Travel rewards credit cards allow consumers to earn points or miles with each dollar they spend with the card. The cards are often associated with specific airlines or hotels, although some instead offer points or generic miles that are redeemed through the card issuer's website for travel with multiple airlines or hotels.  
 
These earn frequent-flier miles or points with their branded airline for regular card spending; those miles or points can be pooled with those you receive when you fly. The best rewards rate is typically for spending with the airline itself.
 Ability to earn airline-specific miles on a favored carrier Higher bonus-miles rewards rate usually offered for airline purchases, and sometimes for other categories like dining or hotels Often confers status in the carrier's frequent-flyer program to allow for higher-priority boarding Significant annual fees Lack of flexibility in redemptions or transfers 
These earn points with the hotel brand's loyalty program on regular card spending at the chain, and sometimes on spending at brand partners, too. 
 Ability to earn points through spending at the branded hotel chain, and sometimes on other spending May automatically confer elite status with the hotel loyalty program Significant annual fees Lack of flexibility in redemptions or transfers 
These earn points or miles from the card issuer that can be redeemed for travel or other rewards through the issuer’s rewards portals. Some additionally provide automatic statement credits for select travel-related purchases, such as incidental airline fees.
 Some offer exceptional benefits like airline lounge access, priority boarding, and primary rental-car insurance Usually offer higher rewards rates for spending on airfare, and sometimes for other categories such as dining and gasoline Some allow you to earn further incentives (like enhanced bonus-points redemption value) if you book travel through the issuer’s reservation portal May offer statement credits for certain travel expenses, such as incidental airline fees Many or most have an annual fee Lack the airline-specific benefits, such as elite status, of co-branded airline or hotel cards   
Not always but since many travel credit cards carry annual fees, it's important to determine if you'll derive sufficient value from a card to justify the expense. That requires understanding the card’s rewards, analyzing your spending patterns, and assessing the appeal of any luxury benefits to decide if the card is financially worthwhile for you.
 
If you travel rarely, and don’t spend much on other potentially-bonused categories each month, a no-annual-fee travel card might be a better option. A travel rewards card may neither earn you enough in rewards to justify its cost nor be justifiable on the basis of luxury benefits you may seldom use. For example, airport-lounge access certainly enhances waiting for flights, but may not be worth paying for if you fly infrequently or, if you do, you rarely arrive at the airport early enough to check in at a lounge. 
 
Alternatively, for some road warriors the higher rewards rates of a premium card may allow it to easily justify a sizable annual fee. The extra luxury benefits they enjoy with the card then might essentially seem to be free, though in reality they are subsidized by the annual membership fee itself.
 
Choosing a co-branded airline credit card can be wise if you have a strong brand preference for a particular carrier, and so want to maximize the miles or points you earn in its frequent-flyer program. Those miles or points can help you both to redeem for flights and to reach a higher status level in the carrier’s frequent-flyer program. 
 
Here are some tips to help you decide on whether to get an airline card and, if so, which one to choose: 
 
Even if you travel frequently, acquiring a credit card that’s associated with a particular chain isn’t necessarily a foregone conclusion. Here are some tips to help you evaluate if such a card is a wise choice for you and, if so, which one might be most suitable: 
 
Those considering a general travel credit card, with its flexible points or miles, should consider the following questions:
 
Trying to decide between a general travel rewards credit card or an airline or hotel-specific reward card? You're not alone. Both options have their pluses. Carrier and hotel cards allow you to accumulate your rewards in a single basket, perhaps earning higher loyalty status as you do so. General cards give you the flexibility to both earn and spend rewards with an array of airlines and hotel brands, and so make it easier to take advantage of the best deals on tickets and hotels, regardless of brand.
 
The ultimate goal with travel rewards cards is to leverage card spending to earn future award travel. So your choice between types should hinge on how best to leverage your spending patterns to earn that rewards travel. If you’re loyal to particular brands that match your preferences, and that serve you well in the places you travel most, you should probably favor a branded card. On the other hand, if you tend to play the field with your travel providers, and want a card that rewards that strategy, a general card might serve you best.  
 
The biggest difference between all the different types of travel credit cards and cash-back credit cards is the type of "currency" each earns. Travel cards earn miles or points that can be redeemed for travel through the card issuer or with airlines or hotels. Cash-back cards earn a percentage rebate on purchases, most often paid in the form of statement credits, gift cards, or checks payable to the cardholder. (However, some cash-back cards technically earn points, which are then converted to statement credits, gift cards, or checks.) 
 During the current pandemic lockdown consumers may potentially realize more near-term value from a cash back credit card given travel earning and redemption options will likely be limited in 2020. 
Another major difference between the card types is that most travel cards carry annual fees while most cash-back cards do not. When deciding between a travel or cash-back card, then, you typically need to determine whether your yearly spending is likely to generate enough value to justify the travel card’s annual fee.  
 
For those who don't spend much on credit cards, or simply don't like the financial risk involved with paying an annual fee, a cash-back card with no annual fee can be a safe choice. However, those who wish to earn award travel, and whose spending patterns justify paying an annual fee, may get more value out from a travel rewards card. 
 
Comparing rewards and benefits among travel credit cards can be a complex exercise. But it’s well worth the effort. Consider these terms and features when comparing card offers, regardless of the card type you have chosen:
 
Ask yourself the following questions before deciding which travel rewards card best suits your goals and spending:
 
There are plenty of ways to gain the most value possible from a particular card. Here are some of those strategies:  
 
Travel rewards credit cards can be excellent tools for earning award travel to vacation destinations or paying for required personal travel. But they’re not for everyone. Weigh these upsides and downsides to decide if this card type works well for you:
 Allow you to leverage your normal spending to amass general travel rewards or partner-specific points or miles Many offer significant bonuses Foreign transaction fees are typically waived Annual fees are common Co-branded travel cards only earn partner-specific rewards General travel rewards cards don’t provide partner loyalty benefits 
For most travel rewards credit cards, the key determination you should make is whether the card’s rewards are worth the annual fee that is likely charged. For many travelers, the answer is affirmative, since the combination of a one-time bonus and ongoing rewards provide significant value. But for others, including many infrequent travelers, typical spending won't generate sufficient rewards to justify paying an annual fee, or the fee may create anxiety about whether its cost will or won't be justified by rewards. For these travelers, another type of card might better suit your finances and temperament.
 
Our list of the best travel rewards cards considered both general travel-rewards credit cards and co-branded cards marketed by major card issuers in partnership with specific air carriers and hotel chains.
 
Among the travel rewards cards, we also considered the best choice within certain subcategories, such as the best airline and hotel cards and the top choices that offer a one-time bonus. Since card bonuses, rewards, pricing, and features tend to evolve over time, and new cards continually enter the market, we will revisit our picks every month and adjust them as needed. 
 
In order to track and assess the U.S. domestic credit card market, we gather scores of data points on more than 300 cards. This data is collected manually from both card-issuer websites and publicly available sources. 
 
To ensure our information is as up-to-date as possible, we deploy automated tools that monitor changes in such key data as annual percentage rates, introductory rates, introductory periods, bonus offers, rewards earnings rates, fees and card benefits. We then rapidly make any needed updates to our card listings, reviews, and recommendations to ensure that readers have the most reliable information and advice. 
 
Once we collect credit card data we organize it in our database according to features, which roll up into feature sets (such as rewards, interest, fees, benefits and Security/Customer Service). Each individual card feature is assigned a star rating score on a 1 to 5 scale using a formula. For instance, for a one-time bonus score we would use a formula like (if bonus is $500 or greater, then assign a score of 5; if $300-$499 then 4, and so forth). Weighting of scores. Once all of each card’s features have received a score we apply a weighting factor to each feature to arrive at a weighted average score for each card (according to the general category in which it resides, such as travel rewards). 
 
This weighting process allows us to assign significantly more emphasis to the attributes important to a particular category, and downplay those that are less relevant to it. That allows us to objectively identify cards that stand out in their category, and why they do. For example, we apply significantly higher weight to such travel-specific features as airport lounge access or primary rental car insurance than we do to attributes such as interest rates or fees that might be more strongly considered for other categories, such as balance-transfer cards.
 
Another critical factor we consider when rating and ranking travel cards and other types of rewards cards are the cards’ effective earnings rates. We first calculate the average value of points or miles for all the rewards cards in our database, a painstaking process that entails collecting all airline fare data by carrier across scores of popular domestic and international city-pairs along with per-night hotel charges at all major hotel brands. 
