
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Few things are more exciting than the thrill of getting engaged. But once the newness wears off, you may face the challenge of paying for a wedding. Unfortunately, it may be more expensive than you expect. 
 
The average cost of a wedding is $44,105, according to Brides American Wedding Survey from 2018.﻿﻿ That's honeymoon not included. If you’re short on cash, you may consider borrowing money to make up the difference. One popular option is applying for a personal loan.
 
To narrow down the options, we’ve created a list of the best wedding personal loans. We looked at the most competitive loans—along with 25 important data points. Here’s how to decide on the best wedding loan to pay for your big day.
 
LightStream, an online division of SunTrust Bank, offers wedding loans with rates as low as 5.95%. The company pledges to beat any competitor by at least 0.10%. Borrowers with excellent credit may qualify for loan amounts up to $100,000. LightStream’s competitive rates, large loan amounts, and quick funding make it an attractive option for borrowers with excellent credit.﻿﻿
 Competitive starting interest rate: Rates start at 5.95% for wedding loans No fees: There are no origination, prepayment, or late payments fees Quick funding: Possible same-day funding with loan approval before 2:30 p.m. EST Difficult to qualify: Borrowers need a good to excellent credit score No ability to prequalify: You can't check rates without a hard pull on your credit score Online application only: You can't apply by phone or in person 
Other important information:﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Read the full review: LightStream Personal Loans
 
OneMain Financial, which has more than 1,500 branches, offers wedding loans for borrowers with credit challenges. The company offers secured personal loans with annual percentage rates (APRs) starting at 18% and some borrowers may pay an origination fee as high as 10%. OneMain Financial does offer fast funding and the ability to prequalify, though.﻿﻿
 Easier to qualify: Borrowers with less-than-perfect credit can still qualify Prequalify: You can prequalify and check rates with a soft credit inquiry Possible same-day funding: If approved for a loan before 12 p.m. you can get the funds that day Less competitive APR: Some competitors offer better rates Low maximum loan amount: The maximum loan is $20,000 Potential for origination fees: Depending on where you live you may be charged origination fees 
Other important information:﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Read the full review: OneMain Financial Presonal Loans
 
SoFi, an online finance company, offers a competitive option for wedding personal loans. The company offers rates as low as 5.99%—along with exclusive member benefits. You may borrow up to $100,000 and enjoy SoFi’s unemployment protection policy. ﻿﻿
 Competitive starting interest rate: Rates start at 5.99% for wedding loans Prequalify: You can prequalify with a soft credit check  Unemployment protection: This feature is for a job loss that isn’t your fault  Tough to qualify: You'll need good to excellent credit Better rates elsewhere: Borrowers with excellent credit may find better rates at competitors Slower funding: It takes longer than some competitors to receive funds 
Other important information:﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Read the full review: SoFi Personal Loans
 
Marcus by Goldman Sachs is a solid option if you’re looking for wedding debt consolidation. The company may pay your creditors directly, with a personal loan of up to $40,000. Borrowers with good to excellent credit may qualify for rates as low as 6.99%. ﻿﻿
 No fees: Fee-free personal loans Prequalify: You can prequalify and check rates with a soft credit check Change payment due date: Change the date up to three times Difficult to qualify: Borrowers need good to excellent credit Better rates elsewhere: Borrowers with excellent credit can find better rates elsewhere Slower funding: It takes longer to get funds than some competitors 
Other important information:﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Read the full review: Marcus Personal Loans
 
Best Egg is another popular online lender with competitive rates starting at 5.99%. The company offers personal loans for life’s big events—including your wedding. You may borrow between $2,000 to $35,000 and apply for a second loan after six months of on-time payments.﻿﻿
 Competitive starting rate: Rates start at 5.99% for personal loans Prequalify: Prequalify with a soft credit check Qualify with a fair credit score: Borrowers can qualify with a 640 credit score Origination fee: These fees ranges from 0.99% to 6.99% Late payment fee: You'll pay $15 after a three-day grace period Tough to qualify for best rates: Borrowers need a 700 credit score and $100,000 income to get the best rates 
Other important information:﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Read the full review: Best Egg Personal Loans
 
If you don’t have the cash to pay for a wedding, you may borrow the money with a personal loan. You can use the proceeds to pay for the venue, catering, live music, and more. To qualify, most lenders will consider your income, employment, credit history, and debt-to-income ratio.
 
It depends. If you have good to excellent credit, you may qualify for the most competitive wedding loans. These personal loans may have lower interest rates than the average credit card. But you need to weigh the pros and cons before applying. 
 
It may be challenging to start a marriage with thousands of dollars in debt. In many cases, it may be better to consider alternatives to taking on debt—like saving more money or asking your family to chip in. 
 
It may be difficult to find competitive wedding loans with bad credit. You may have fewer options or wind up paying higher interest rates. You may save money by taking a few months to improve your credit score or applying with a cosigner. 
 
There are several options for getting a wedding loan. These options may include:
 
You can apply for a wedding loan through a traditional or brick-and-mortar bank such as:
 
You may find attractive wedding loan options through non-profit credit unions including:
 
Online lenders without a physical location may offer wedding loans including:
 
You may also explore wedding loan options with peer-to-peer lenders. These companies offer lending and borrowing between individuals:
 
A wedding loan can be an affordable way to pay for your big day—especially when compared to the cost of credit card debt. But it’s important to weigh the risks of a personal loan and whether you can afford the payments. If it feels like too much, it may be worthwhile to explore other options like extending your engagement, slashing your wedding budget, or asking for gifts. 
 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders for all borrowing needs. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders including interest rates, fees, loan amounts and repayment terms to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Brides. "The Ultimate Guide to the Wedding Budget: How to Allocate Your Funds and Tricks to Stay on Track." Accessed Aug. 14, 2020. LightStream. “Wedding Financing.” Accessed August 6, 2020. LightStream. "FAQs: Good Credit." Accessed August 6, 2020. LightStream. “Lending Uncomplicated.” Accessed August 6, 2020. OneMain Financial. “Personal Loans.” Accessed August 6, 2020. OneMain Financial. “Loan Fees.” Accessed August 6, 2020. OneMain Financial. “Find Out If You are Prequalified.” Accessed August 6, 2020. SoFi. "SoFi Personal Loans." Accessed August 6, 2020. SoiFi. ”Frequently Asked Questions.” Accessed Sept. 23, 2020.