
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty has been providing Colorado residents home warranties since 1985. The company offers a selection of three plans for homeowners that cover the repair or replacement costs on major home systems and appliances. Customers may also purchase additional coverage for things like pools, hot tubs, and more.
 
Compared to other home warranty companies, Blue Ribbon Home Warranty has a lower-than-average annual cost for its coverage of major home systems, but a higher-than-average cost for its combination plan that covers both major home systems and appliances. We review Blue Ribbon Home Warranty based on coverage, limits, price, and more.
 
Important: Blue Ribbon Home Warranty is not one of our top-rated home warranty providers. You can review our list of the best home warranty companies for what we think are better options.
 
Investopedia is committed to providing our readers with unbiased product recommendations. We may receive compensation when you click on links to products, but this doesn't affect how we rate, review, and rank them.
 Plan coverage is for 14 months Customer service representatives are in-house $65 Trade Service Fee Home warranty plans are only available in Colorado Requires $75 deposit at the time of enrollment Home inspection required to ensure complete coverage 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty was founded in 1985 with its headquarters located in Lakewood, Colorado. The company only provides service to residents of Colorado with home warranty plans that offer 14 months of coverage instead of the normal 12 months. Blue Ribbon Home Warranty prides itself on the fact that its customer service representatives are kept in-house.   
 
Three plans are available from Blue Ribbon Home Warranty: Silver, Gold, and Platinum. In addition to a $75 deposit at the time of enrollment, the company charges a $65 trade service fee (TSF) for each visit.
 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty offers coverage on individual items for an additional cost. You can also select items carte blanche if you want to have protection on an item that is not covered under the home warranty plan that you select. As an example, if you select the Silver plan, but want coverage on your washer, you could pay an additional $50 for it.
 
Below are the rates for optional coverage items.
 
Receiving a quote is as easy as downloading the company’s brochure as a PDF and selecting one of three plans. Once you choose your plan you can enroll online, by email, or by phone.
 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty charges a $75 deposit when you enroll on top of its monthly payment. There is also a $65 trade service fee (TSF) due each time a service call is placed. Unlike many other warranty companies, contracts are for 14 months.
 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty has strict guidelines for coverage on certain items and there are many exclusions. While most exclusions are typical for a home warranty company, there are some that are a bit more unusual. For example, coverage on a cooling system is contingent upon receipt of an approved inspection that is required for you to begin coverage. There are other items that may require an inspection, such as coverage for a pool or hot tub.
 
Since the majority of complaints filed against Blue Ribbon Home Warranty have been because of these types of exclusions, we suggest you study the sample contract carefully and inquire as to whether an inspection is needed before you purchase coverage.
 
Payout caps vary depending on the item being serviced rather than being one aggregate cap for the entire warranty term. For example, Blue Ribbon Home Warranty will pay up to $2,000 for heating systems, $1,000 for a water heater, and $250 for a hood, kitchen, or bathroom exhaust fan. Payout caps are about average for the industry, but the company does also reserve the right to issue cash back on items covered by the contract in lieu of repair or replacement. This could present a problem if your cashout amount is not enough to replace the item. You could then find yourself making up the difference in cost out of pocket.
 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty guarantees that a service provider will respond within 24 hours of a placed service call or your Trade Service Fee is waived, which is unique among the companies we have reviewed. This fee waiver does not apply to weekends and holidays, however, and unless you have an emergency, repairs are only made during normal business hours. This is about average for the home warranty industry. 
 
Customer support is available 24/7 by calling 303-986-3900 or you can file a claim online. Response time is typically within 24 hours except on the weekends and holidays. Rather than use a call center, Blue Ribbon Home Warranty uses in-house customer service representatives to assist you with your claims.
 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty has an A+ rating with the Better Business Bureau (BBB) with 11 complaints filed in the last three years.﻿﻿ This is way below average for a home warranty company, especially one that has been in business since 1985.
 
A look at the complaints showed that many of the customers who left a review had a disagreement about whether a part that needed repair was covered under their policy. As an example, a customer complained about a furnace making a noise, which is not covered under their contract. In another example, a valve had been replaced and the valve was still under warranty from the manufacturer, so it was not covered by the home warranty coverage.
 
Consumers also had issues when unable to produce an inspection or maintenance report for covered items and were denied coverage as a result. To their credit, the company does address issues like this when they arise and Blue Ribbon appears to want to work with their customers to achieve a resolution.
 
To provide a comparison between Blue Ribbon Home Warranty and the competition, we chose the national company American Home Shield. Both companies serve Colorado, and Blue Ribbon Home Warranty’s Bronze plan and American Home Shield’s Combo plan have similar coverage. 
 
Blue Ribbon Home Warranty certainly gets the edge when it comes to price, coming in $290 less than American Home Shield. When diving into what is covered for that price, we see that both companies cover big items, such as refrigerators, water heaters, and electrical systems, but there are some differences in some of the smaller items.
 
For example, American Home Shield covers free-standing ice makers and built-in food centers, while Blue Ribbon Home Warranty does not. On the other hand, when looking at add-on coverage, Blue Ribbon Home Warranty provides coverage on roof leak repairs and even gas fireplaces. This type of coverage is not common in the home warranty industry, giving Blue Ribbon Home Warranty an even bigger edge.
 
Finally, although American Home Shield does allow you to choose between a $75, $100, and $125 Trade Service Fee, it still does not bring the cost down as low as Blue Ribbon Home Warranty. Plus, Blue Ribbon only charges $65 for its Trade Service Fee, making Blue Ribbon Home Warranty the clear winner.
 
There are a lot of things we like about Blue Ribbon Home Warranty and a few things we don’t. While you do get a lot of coverage for a cost that is lower than average for most of the home warranty industry, some people may not like the hoops you have to jump through to ensure you have full coverage. The company can also choose to simply give you a cash payout rather than attempt to make repairs or give you a replacement. This may create a problem if a comparable replacement is more than the cash offered.
 
For the most part, however, Blue Ribbon Home Warranty's lower term cost, lower Trade Service Fee, and in-house customer representatives, outweigh the negatives and make this a strong contender for Colorado homeowners.
 
Get a Quote from Blue Ribbon Home Warranty.
 
We look at a variety of factors when reviewing a company’s home warranty plans. This includes monthly cost, Trade Service Fees, exclusions, payout caps, and overall customer satisfaction. In addition, we look at how a company compares with its competitors by annual average cost, BBB ratings, and more.
 
Learn more: Read our Home Warranty Review Methodology here.
 Better Business Bureau "Blue Ribbon Home Warranty." Accessed June 1, 2020.