
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
BMO Harris Bank is a traditional retail bank headquartered in Chicago that offers a full range of deposit, lending, and investment products. Founded in 1882 and now a subsidiary of the Bank of Montreal—hence, the "BMO" in its name—it is the eighth largest bank in North America, with $138 billion in assets, 12 million consumer and business customers, and more than 500 branches across eight states. This in-depth review of this major regional bank can help you decide if its deposit accounts are right for you.
 Low or easy to avoid fees Low minimums to open accounts Several debit card options High balances required to earn competitive interest rates Limited geographic footprint 
BMO Harris Bank is best for customers who live in one of the states where it has physical branches: Illinois, Indiana, Arizona, Missouri, Minnesota, Kansas, Florida, or Wisconsin.﻿﻿
 
The bank may also be a good fit for customers who:
 
BMO Harris has its own ATMs and partners with Allpoint to offer over 40,000 ATMs nationwide that customers can use without a fee.﻿﻿ If you use an ATM outside its network, BMO Harris charges $3 per transaction.﻿﻿
 
As you might expect from a financial institution of its size, BMO Harris Bank offers a wide array of all the usual banking products and services for consumers and businesses, including:
 
Customers have three checking account options to choose from.
 
Each checking account offers three different debit cards to choose from. The BMO Harris Bank Debit Mastercard provides return protection up to $250 and extended warranty on eligible items.﻿﻿ The World Debit Mastercard adds purchase protection in case your item is damaged or stolen within 90 days.﻿﻿ Sports fans can show their pride and save 10% on team gear with Bulls, Blackhawks, or Bucks-themed Debit Mastercards.﻿﻿
 
The Platinum Money Market Account from BMO Harris Bank carries no monthly fees. But it requires a minimum deposit of $5,000 and you need to maintain that balance to earn interest.﻿﻿
 
A BMO Harris Bank Statement Savings Account can be opened with a minimum of $25. There is a $5 monthly service charge if your minimum balance falls below $100. Customers under the age of 25 are not charged this fee.﻿﻿
 
Certificates of deposit (CDs) are available from three to 60 months with a minimum deposit of $1,000. Customers that deposit $100,000 or more have access to one- and two-month CD terms as well. BMO Harris Bank offers higher rates at $100,000.﻿﻿
 
The bank occasionally offers special-term CDs with attractive interest rates to meet its funding needs. An Add-On CD is also available for customers that want to augment an existing certificate, without affecting its maturity date.﻿﻿
 
At maturity, CDs automatically renew at the current market rate. Customers are sent a notice of maturity by mail and have 10 days from the maturity date to withdraw funds without penalty.﻿﻿
 
Early withdrawal penalties vary based on the CD's term and can be waived if the owner passes away or is judicially declared legally incompetent.﻿﻿
 
BMO Harris Bank has several credit card options, all of them part of the Mastercard network. These choices include cards that earn cash back, rewards credit cards, and balance transfer cards. Here are some of the cards it offers:
 
Rewards Credit Cards
 
Cash Back Credit Cards
 
Balance Transfer Credit Cards
 
BMO Harris Bank offers additional financial products, including:
 
To connect with BMO Harris Bank customer service, you have several options. You can visit any of the over 500 branches in Illinois, Indiana, Arizona, Missouri, Minnesota, Kansas, Florida, and Wisconsin.﻿﻿ Customer service can be reached by phone 24 hours a day at 1-888-340-2265.﻿﻿ Automated phone banking is also available 24 hours a day.﻿﻿
 
You may also contact BMO Harris Bank through online banking and its mobile app. The high-ranking mobile app is available for both Apple (where it scores 4.7 out of 5, based on 17,400 ratings)﻿﻿ and Android (4.3 out of 5, based on 4,329 ratings).﻿﻿ Through the app, you can also pay bills, view transactions, deposit checks, and more.
 
To open an account with BMO Harris Bank, the best options are in-person or online. If you live in one of the eight states where BMO Harris has branches, you can open an account in-person. Opening an account online from anywhere is also available.
 Given its full menu of financial products and accounts, BMO Harris Bank offers a truly one-stop-shopping experience. And it appeals to a variety of consumers, from those who can invest five or even six figures in a CD to those who have only $25 to open an account with. Its modest minimums, along with its fee waivers for those under 25, suggests it's sensitive to students and young savers, and wants to encourage them in building good financial habits. On the other hand, while there are no and low-fee deposit options, if you want the best perks and highest interest rates, you'll need to deposit some serious money—and maintain account balances of $5,000 or more. Also, while BMO Harris can handle almost every banking need under one roof, it doesn't offer that many roofs—if you live outside the eight states with branches. As a regional bank, it is most appealing for customers located in one of the states where it has a brick-and-mortar presence. Although accounts can be opened online and serviced through the mobile app, there are better digital banking alternatives that offer competitive rates without the high minimums BMO Harris requires. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 BMO Harris Bank. "You're Invited to Open a Checking Account." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Savings Accounts, Money Markets and CDs." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Statement Savings Account." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Bank Debit Mastercard." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Certificate of Deposit." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Platinum Money Market Account." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Bank Facts." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "ATMs." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Smart Advantage™ Account." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Homepage." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Smart Money™ Account." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Premier™ Account." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Bank World Debit Mastercard." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Bulls, Blackhawks or Bucks: Which Card’s for You?" Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "BMO Harris Handbook," Page 8. Accessed Sept. 4, 2020. BMO Harris Bank. "Certificate of Deposit (CD) Deposit Account Disclosure and Bank Fee Schedule." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020.