
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The BP Visa offers 10 cents off per gallon on fuel purchased at participating BP and Amoco gas stations, as well as 3% cash back on groceries and 1% cash back on all other purchases. The one-time offer triples fuel savings in the first 30 days. It has no annual fee.
 Get 25¢ off per gallon during your first 30 days as a cardholder. The BP Visa Card is not one of our top-rated cash back credit cards. You can review our list of the best cash back credit cards for what we think are better options. 10 cents per gallon off fuel from BP and Amoco 3% cash back on groceries Application could result in getting a less appealing card One-time offer value is low Using Apple Pay invalidates the card’s gas rewards 
The BP Visa is best suited to those who often visit a BP or Amoco station to fill up. The 10-cents-a-gallon rebate on gas could really add up over a year. The card should have special appeal to those whose vehicles have especially large gas tanks, since there’s no limit on the number of gallons per fill-up eligible for the discount. By contrast, the similar Shell Fuel Rewards restricts the discount to the first 20 gallons. That cap could deprive someone who fills up a Ford F150, with its 23-gallon tank, of receiving the discount on the final few gallons they buy. 
 
The BP Visa is also a decent option if you have no other card that provides strong rewards on grocery purchases. The card’s 3% in cash back meets or exceeds what you’d earn at supermarkets with a better cash-back card. However, since the rewards you earn can only be used for BP or Amoco fuel purchases, those who purchase gasoline elsewhere will not likely find enough benefits to consider this card.
 
The BP Visa offers a one-time offer in the form of cents off per gallon of fuel purchases for the first 30 days from opening your account. You get 15 cents off in additional bonus savings when you charge purchases to the card at BP and Amoco stations. A further 5 cents a gallon in savings is available if you load your BP Visa into the BPme mobile app and use the app for your fuel purchases.
 
Bonuses aside, this card provides 10 cents off per gallon on fuel purchases made at BP and Amoco stations. The discount is reflected in the price that’s displayed after you swipe the BP Visa card at the pump. The only exception comes if you link the card to Apple Pay, and then use the app to pay for the gas transaction. In that case, you will receive only the card’s default reward rate on all purchases, which is 1% in cash back.
 
Grocery purchases provide 3% in cash back, All other purchases, other than BP or Amoco fuel, provide 1% cash back. You receive rewards in the form of credit statements.
 
There is no limit to the rewards you can earn. 
 
Redeeming your rewards takes no effort on your part. The 10 cents off per gallon is applied at the pump when you use your BP Visa credit card. With all other transactions, including those for groceries, the cash back you earn is applied as a statement credit within 2 billing cycles after the period in which they are earned.
 
The simplicity of the BP Visa credit card makes it easy to maximize your rewards. First, make sure to take full advantage of the introductory one-time offer of up to 30 cents off per gallon at BP and Amoco stations in the first 30 days from opening your account. If you’re comfortable with using mobile payment apps, consider getting the BPme app and using that to pay for your BP and Amoco fuel. That arrangement will earn you an extra 5 cents in bonus savings during the first 30 days.
 
After the introductory period, try to make fuel purchases at BP and Amoco stations, assuming that one is convenient, of course, and its price is no more than 10 cents less than nearby competitors. 
 
You’ll likely also benefit from using your card to make grocery purchases, since it’s not likely that another card in your wallet provides more than the 3% cash back the BP Visa provides on these purchases. and all other purchases (except BP and Amoco fuel purchases) to earn 1% cash back. Since the cash back is automatically applied as a statement credit, there’s nothing you have to do to redeem or maximize your cash back. That said, you could earn more cash back on all other purchases with a credit card that offers 2% cash back.
