
A bad credit score can work against you in more ways than one. When you have poor credit, getting approved for new loans or lines of credit may be difficult. If you qualify, you may end up paying a higher interest rate to borrow. A low credit score can also result in having to pay higher security deposits for utility or cellphone services.
 
In those scenarios you may consider a tactic known as “pay for delete,” in which you pay to have negative information removed from your credit report. While it may sound tempting, it’s not necessarily a quick fix for better credit.
 
First, it’s helpful to understand what it means to pay to have bad credit report information removed. According to Paul T. Joseph, attorney, CPA, and founder of Joseph & Joseph Tax and Payroll in Williamston, Mich., “Pay for delete is essentially when you are contacted by your creditor, or you contact them, and you agree to pay a portion or all of the outstanding balance with an agreement that the creditor will contact the credit bureau and remove any derogatory comments or indications of late payment on the account.”
 
A pay for delete letter should include:
 
You’re essentially asking the creditor to take back any negative remarks it may have added to your credit file in connection with late or missed payments or a collection account. By paying some or all of the outstanding balance, you’re hoping that the creditor will exercise a show of goodwill and remove negative information from your credit report for that account.
 Consumers have the right to sue credit bureaus and creditors with regard to inaccurate information that, once disputed, is not investigated and, if warranted, removed. 
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) governs credit reporting laws and guidelines. Anything that a debt collector, creditor, or credit bureau does regarding a credit report will be based on the FCRA, says Joseph P. McClelland, a consumer credit attorney based in Decatur, Ga.
 
Credit bureaus are required to produce accurate credit reports, and consumers have the right to sue creditors and the credit bureaus in certain instances. Specifically, that includes inaccurate information that continues to be reported after a consumer initiates a dispute that the credit bureau fails to investigate.
 
Technically, pay for delete isn’t expressly prohibited by the FCRA, but it shouldn’t be viewed as a blanket get-out-of-bad-credit-jail-free card. “The only items you can force off of your credit report are those that are inaccurate and incomplete,” says McClelland. “Anything else will be at the discretion of the creditor or collector.”
 
Whether your attempts to pay for delete are successful can depend on whether you’re dealing with the original creditor or a debt collection agency. “As to the debt collector, you can ask them to pay for delete,” says McClelland. “This is completely legal under the FCRA. If going this route, you will need to get that in writing, so you can enforce it after the fact.”
 
What you have to keep in mind, however, is that paying for delete with a debt collector may not remove negative information on your credit history reported by the original creditor. The creditor may claim that its contract with the debt collection agency prevents it from changing any information it reported to the credit bureaus for the account. That said, some debt collection agencies take the initiative and request that negative account information be deleted for customers who have successfully paid their collection accounts in full.
 
Hiring a credit repair firm is another option for paying to delete bad credit information. “Credit repair agencies essentially do the work for you by contacting the credit reporting agencies and providing objections to errors contained in the report or requesting that items that are untrue or incorrect be removed from the report,” says McClelland. In this instance you’re not necessarily paying off any outstanding balances. However, you will pay a fee to the credit repair firm to act on your behalf in having negative information removed.
 The typical monthly fee for a credit repair company 
The fees a credit repair company charges can vary. Typically, there are two types of fees: an initial setup fee and a monthly service fee. The initial fee can range from $10 to $100, while the monthly fee typically runs between $30 and $100 a month, although some companies do charge more.
 
When considering the fees, it’s important to weigh what you’re getting in return. According to the Federal Trade Commission, credit repair firms can’t legally do anything for you that you can’t do for yourself. You just have to be willing to spend the time reviewing your credit reports for negative or inaccurate information, reaching out to the credit bureaus to dispute that information, and following up on those disputes to make sure they’re being investigated.
 
If you decide that the time-saving aspect of working with a credit repair firm is worth your money, research any firms you’re considering thoroughly to make sure you'll be working with one of the best credit repair companies available. Joseph says most credit repair agencies are legitimate, but if you come across one that’s making promises that seem too good to be true or using methods to repair credit that aren’t covered by the FCRA, that’s a red flag that the company might be a scam.
 
Also consider the timing before pursuing credit repair services. “After several years of being on your report, the negative impact on your credit score has likely passed,” says McClelland. That’s because, eventually, negative information can fall off your credit report automatically. Late payments and collection accounts can stay on your credit history for up to seven years. A chapter 7 bankruptcy filing can stay on your credit report for up to 10 years.
 Paying your bills on time has the single biggest impact on your credit score. 
If you’d rather not pay for delete or pay a credit repair firm, there are a few steps you can take to begin getting your credit back on track.
 
Bad credit doesn’t have to be a permanent situation. There are things you can do, including pay for delete, to help your credit recovery. Paying to have bad credit removed can be effective, but it’s worth exploring other options if you don’t have money to pay off an outstanding balance or cover the pricey fees a credit repair firm can charge.
