
In tough economic times, people are sometimes left scrambling for cash to meet everyday expenses and lifestyle demands. Sure, you can cash in your life insurance policy to access needed funds—but should you?
 
There are certainly drawbacks to using life insurance to meet immediate cash needs, especially if you're compromising your long-term goals or your family's financial future. Nevertheless, if other options are not available, life insurance—especially cash-value life insurance—can be a source of needed income.
 
Cash-value life insurance, such as whole life and universal life, builds reserves through excess premiums plus earnings. These deposits are held in a cash-accumulation account within the policy.
 
Cash-value life insurance offers the opportunity to access cash accumulations within the policy through withdrawals, policy loans, or partial or full surrender of the policy. Another alternative involves selling your policy for cash, a method known as a life settlement.
 
Be sure to bear in mind that although cash from the policy might be useful during stressful financial times, you could face unwanted consequences depending on the method you use to access the funds.
 
Generally, it is possible to withdraw limited amounts of cash from a life insurance policy. The amount available differs based on the type of policy you own and the company issuing it. The main advantage of cash-value withdrawals is they are not taxable up to your policy basis, as long as your policy is not classified as a modified endowment contract (MEC). A MEC is a term given to a life insurance policy in which the funding exceeds federal tax law limits.
 
However, cash-value withdrawals can have unexpected or unrealized consequences:
 
Most cash-value policies allow you to borrow money from the issuer using your cash-accumulation account as collateral. Depending on the terms of the policy, the loan might be subject to interest at varying rates; however, you are not obligated to financially qualify for the loan. The amount you can borrow is based on the value of the policy's cash-accumulation account and the contract's terms. 
 
The good news is that borrowed amounts from non-MEC policies are not taxable, and you don't have to make payments on the loan, even though the outstanding loan balance might be accruing interest.
 
The bad news is loan balances generally reduce your policy's death benefit, meaning your beneficiaries might receive less than you intended. Also, an unpaid loan that is accruing interest reduces your cash value, which can cause the policy to lapse if insufficient premiums are paid to maintain the death benefit. If the loan is still outstanding when the policy lapses or if you later surrender the insurance, the borrowed amount becomes taxable to the extent the cash value (without reduction for the outstanding loan balance) exceeds your basis in the contract.
 
Policy loans from a policy that is considered a MEC are treated as distributions, meaning the amount of the loan up to the earnings in the policy will be taxable and could also be subject to the pre-59½ early-withdrawal penalty. 
 Withdrawing money or borrowing money from your life insurance policy can reduce your policy's death benefit, while surrendering the policy means you are giving up the right to the death benefit altogether. 
In addition to withdrawals and policy loans, you can surrender (cancel) your policy and use the cash any way you see fit. However, if you surrender the policy during the early years of ownership, surrender fees will likely be charged by the company, reducing your cash value. These charges vary depending on how long you've had the policy. In addition, when you surrender your policy for cash, the gain on the policy is subject to income tax and if you have an outstanding loan balance against the policy, additional taxes could be incurred.
 
Although surrendering the policy can get you the cash you need, you're obviously relinquishing the right to the death-benefit protection afforded by the insurance. If you want to replace the lost death benefit later, it might be harder or more expensive to get the same coverage.
 Consider other options before using your life insurance policy for cash, such as borrowing against your 401(k) plan or taking out a home equity loan; none of these options comes without mitigating issues, but based on your current financial circumstances, some choices are better than others. 
This concept is fairly simple. As the policy owner, you sell your life insurance policy to an individual or a life settlement company in exchange for cash. The new owner will keep the policy in force (by paying the premiums) and reap a return on the investment by receiving the death benefit when you die. 
 
Most types of insurance are eligible for sale, including policies with little or no cash value, such as term insurance. Generally, to qualify for a life settlement, you (the insured) must be at least 65 years old, have a life expectancy of 10 to 15 years or less and a policy death benefit of at least $100,000 (in most cases).
 
The primary advantage to a life settlement is you can potentially get more for the policy than by cashing it in (surrendering the policy). The taxation of life settlements is complicated: The general treatment is that gain in excess of your basis in the policy is taxed to you as ordinary income. Be sure you get expert tax advice before signing over your policy.
 
Although life settlements can be a valuable source of liquidity, consider the following issues:
 
Economic trouble can prompt you to contemplate liquidating assets for cash. Sometimes you might have no other choice, but when it comes to life insurance, think about why you purchased the policy in the first place. Do you still need the coverage? Are the policy's beneficiaries depending on the death benefit if something happens to you? Consider the answers to these questions carefully.
