
Catastrophe accumulation is a term used in the insurance industry that refers to the losses that an insurer or reinsurer may face across a geographic area from a natural disaster. The insurance claims that result from a natural disaster are many, reaching far and wide, and therefore accumulate to a large payout for the insurer, often impacting the insurance company negatively.
 
Businesses and individuals purchase all types of insurance, one of which is catastrophe insurance, which seeks to limit the losses for the insured in the event of any catastrophe, such as an earthquake, fire, or hurricane.
 
Catastrophe accumulation is calculated from a wide range of losses and involves partial loss to total loss across a potentially large number of policies. Normally, insurers and reinsurers absorb individual losses from regular insurance claims relatively easily. The loss severity is typically low compared to the total value of all premiums.
 
A natural disaster, however, can result in losses far exceeding total premiums because the destruction is massive and often covers a large geographic area. Because natural disasters are rare, it is easy for insurers and reinsurers to underestimate the losses that can occur, and thus results in charging a lower premium than the risk actually warrants.
 
Insurance companies evaluate the risk associated with underwriting a new policy by examining the potential severity and frequency of losses. The severity and frequency will vary according to the type of peril, the risk management, and reduction techniques being employed by the insured, and other factors such as geography.
 
For example, the likelihood that a fire insurance policy will see a loss depends on how close buildings are to each other, how far away the nearest fire station is, and what fire prevention measures the building has in place.
 
An insurer takes into account the occurrence of natural disasters in the locality specific to the insurance policy; however, when a natural disaster occurs the insurer can face costs that far exceed the amount the policyholder has paid to the insurer. This is the case because it is difficult to determine the losses from a natural disaster.
 
In order to mitigate the risks associated with natural disasters, insurers purchase catastrophe reinsurance. Catastrophe reinsurance allows the insurer to shift some or all of the risk associated with policies that it underwrites in exchange for a portion of the premiums that it receives from policyholders. This means that it won't be liable for all claims, only the amounts it has not shifted to the reinsurance company. This is usually a specific amount with a cap or an amount above a decided limit. Purchasing reinsurance usually helps insurance companies avoid insolvency.
 
Companies may create an estimate of a worst-case scenario by calculating probable maximum loss (PML) in order to charge proper premiums in areas prone to natural disasters. For example, an insurance company could create a table that models annual aggregate PML for hurricanes over a 100-year and 200-year period, net of reinsurance.
 
Creating such a model allows an insurance company to determine the percentage chance that losses resulting from a hurricane would exceed a certain threshold of an insurer’s reserves and equity. Long time periods are chosen because catastrophes are rare events. Developing long-term models can be difficult because of a lack of an industry-wide standard in preparing data for use in the model and because third-party estimates may show wide variations.
