
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Cathay Pacific Visa Signature varies its rewards based on where you buy, offering a better miles rate for purchases made abroad (and with Cathay Pacific). It has a generous one-time bonus for new cardmembers, no foreign transaction fees, and flexible redemption options. It also has a $95 annual fee and limited travel benefits.
 Earn 40,000 miles when you spend $2,000 in the first 90 days of opening an account. The Cathay Pacific Visa Signature Card is not one of our top-rated airline credit cards. You can review our list of the best airline credit cards for what we think are better options. Generous one-time offer Valuable rewards program Complimentary $100 Marco Polo Club membership Limited travel benefits for an airline card Reward miles have an expiration date 
The Cathay Pacific Visa Signature is best-suited to people who regularly travel on the carrier on long flights between the United States and Asia, where most of the carrier’s destinations are located. Using the card to buy four or more such flights a year should get you well on your way to earning enough in rewards to easily justify the $95 annual fee. It’s also a decent card for those willing to use its miles rewards to buy travel benefits as well as awards flights. During your first year with the card, for example, you could use some of the card’s 40,000 one-time bonus miles to redeem for benefits such as seat upgrades and lounge visits through the card’s complimentary Marco Polo Club membership.This is also a fine choice for purchases when traveling abroad. You’ll earn 1.5 miles per dollar spent—yielding a decent value of 3 cents per dollar—on all purchases made outside of the United States. And no foreign transaction fees apply to those transactions
 
Frequent travelers who fly via Cathay Pacific, Cathay Dragon, or an Asia Miles partner will find the card beneficial since you can redeem your miles for flights on those airlines. You can also redeem your rewards for upgrades, companion tickets, hotel accommodations, and merchandise.
 
If you spend $2,000 within the first 90 days of opening an account, you’ll earn 40,000 miles. According to Investopedia’s calculations, each mile is worth approximately 2 cents each, so the 40,000-mile bonus is worth $800—which is a generous bonus for an airline card. 
 
With the Cathay Pacific Visa Signature, you’ll earn: 
 
Your Asia Miles can be redeemed for flights, hotel stays, car rentals, gift cards, and even charitable donations. 
 
While we benchmark the value of Asia Miles at around 2 cents each based on booking flights with Cathay Pacifc, keep in mind that your actual value will vary based on your travel destination and time of year. Other redemption options may yield even less value. . To get the most value for your points, redeem them for flights, and pay attention to the cost in cash vs miles to ensure you are getting a value around 2 cents per mile.
 
With the Cathay Pacific Visa Signature, you’re not limited to redeeming your miles for flights only on Cathay Pacific. Instead, you can redeem your Asia Miles for partner flights, which include American Airlines, British Airways, Air Canada, and Lufthansa. Miles requirements are sometimes no higher than for Cathay Pacific flights, and may even be lower.  
 
You can convert your Asia Miles into points with other loyalty programs. However, true to this card’s emphasis on spending abroad, all three options involve conversion to programs you can use only in southeast Asia:
 
Making the most of this card begins with ensuring you spend $2,000 on it within the first 90 days after opening an account. That relatively easy “spend” earns you 40,000 miles that we estimate are worth $800 when used to buy awards flights on Cathay Pacific. Then, consistently use the Cathay Pacific Visa Signature for the categories in which it provides the best rewards. Airfare on Cathay Pacific flights earns 2 miles per dollar spent, and dining and purchases outside of the United States both earn 1.5 miles.
 
Those earnings can add up to a significant amount, especially on a foreign trip built around long Cathay Pacific flights. For example, let’s detail the spending and rewards if you used your card on the following transactions, all listed in U.S. dollars:
 
In total, you’d spend $2,251 on your trip, and earn 4,087 Asia Miles. Valued at 2 cents each, those miles would be worth about $81.74 when redeemed for travel arrangements. 
 
This card offers a few standout benefits: 
