
Estate planning involves the provision of a set of legal, financial, and accounting advisory services to help clients transfer their assets to heirs in a tax-efficient way. There are a number of estate planning certifications available to finance, accounting, and legal professionals with relevant experience. Candidates must meet a minimum level of requirements first.
 
If you are considering a career in estate planning or you are looking to hire an estate planner, the following will give you an overview of the specific certifications associated with the role and what each requires and delivers.
 
Estate planners typically work with individual investors, family offices, business owners, and high-net-worth individuals. The role of an estate planner is complex and involves many moving parts.
 
An estate planner works with clients to formulate and implement a tax-planning strategy to efficiently pass assets to heirs and other beneficiaries, according to the client's wishes. Other aspects of estate planning range from bequeathing charitable contributions to choosing life insurance.
 
Some major estate-planning providers integrate their practice with financial advisory and wealth management services. Wealth managers, trust officers and trust administrators, investment officers, lawyers, accountants, and financial planners all could have an interest in pursuing certifications.
 
Most estate planners have law, accounting, or finance degrees and certifications—and for good reason. Estate planning is a complicated maze of federal and state laws, IRS rulings, and judicial interpretations. These all affect how assets and income are treated for tax purposes based on a wide array of types of transactions, transfers, triggering events, individual profiles—age, single or married, etc.—and entities. Creating and managing these transactions requires understanding fiduciary duties and responsibilities.
 
The constantly changing laws, as well as shifts in the judicial and political climate, make estate planning a highly dynamic field in which advisors engineer transactions that must hold water with authorities. Certain practices and insights can have a short shelf life.
 
In addition to various financial advanced degrees, law degrees, and certifications—an MBA, MPA, JD, CPA, and CFA—the specific, complex, and constantly changing nature of the field makes special certifications helpful. Having one or more of these certifications also gives estate planners added credibility, which provides clients with an extra degree of trust and helps in growing their business.
 Earning an estate planning certification typically requires training courses in ethics, financial planning, tax law, compliance, and the regulatory environment. 
Below are the most common certifications an estate planner may hold.
 
The Global Academy of Finance and Management is the certifying body for the CTEP designation, which has an emphasis on professionals who serve high-net-worth clients. Earning a CTEP requires at least three years of experience in estate planning or trusts. Additionally, candidates must have:
 
The AEP designation is awarded by the National Association of Estate Planners & Councils. Candidates must be or have the following:
 
The CFTA (formerly the "certified trust and financial advisor") is awarded by the American Bankers Association. The requirements include:
 
To maintain the designation, 45 credits of continuing education are required every three years.﻿﻿
 
There are also a number of certifications related to estate planning that may be useful. These include the following:
 
Becoming an estate planner can be difficult and requires experience and a breadth of knowledge, including law, accounting, and finance. Earning an estate planning certification enhances the skills of estate planners and their credibility, especially in the eyes of potential clients.
 GAFM Global Academy of Finance & Management. "Certification & Designation." Accessed May 20, 2020. National Association of Estate Planners & Councils. "AEP Introduction." Accessed May 20, 2020. American Bankers Association. "Certified Trust and Fiduciary Advisor (CTFA)." Accessed July 28, 2020.