
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Chase Bank is a full-service bank with almost 4,900 branches and 16,000 ATMs.﻿﻿ Its roots date back to 1799 in New York City, when it was founded to supply drinking water to the city’s population. A small provision in its charter allowed for banking operations with surplus capital, and within five months it opened a bank as the Bank of Manhattan Company.﻿﻿
 
In the 200-plus years of its history, more than 1,200 institutions have come together to form the largest financial institution in the U.S. with $2.6 trillion in assets worldwide.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ This in-depth review of the online banking giant can help you decide if its deposit accounts are right for you.
 Large footprint to service your banking needs Ability to waive checking fees Popular credit cards with well-known brands A limited number of branches in some states Minimum daily balance to waive fees Chase 5/24 Rule for credit cards 
Chase Bank is best for clients who live in states where the bank has clusters of branches. Chase Bank is ideal if for those who:
 
As you might expect from a depository institution of its size, Chase Bank offers an extensive menu of accounts and services. Customers have access to multiple checking accounts, savings accounts, certificates of deposit (CDs), credit cards, and other lending products to meet their needs. The bank rewards customers who have multiple Chase products with better pricing and the ability to combine balances to waive fees.
 
Customers have several checking account options with Chase Bank. Each account has monthly maintenance fees unless you meet the criteria to waive them. The three most common accounts are the Chase Total Checking, Chase Premier Plus Checking, and Chase Sapphire Checking.﻿﻿ The Premier Plus Checking account waives the $2.50 non-Chase ATM fee up to four times each statement cycle. The Sapphire Checking account waives ATM fees and reimburses fees that other banks charge an unlimited number of times.﻿﻿
 
Chase also offers additional niche checking accounts that cater to specific audiences. The Chase Secure Banking checking account has no minimum deposit, no paper checks, and does not charge for money orders or cashier’s checks.﻿﻿ College students can get a free account for up to five years while in school with the Chase College Checking account, and it is only $6 per month after that if you don’t waive the fee with qualifying activities.﻿﻿ Active and veteran members of the military can open a Chase Premier Plus Checking account with no fees or minimum balance requirements.﻿﻿
 
Customers with larger relationships may qualify for Chase Private Client. To qualify, you’ll need an average daily balance of $250,000 combined among your qualifying personal and business deposits and investments.﻿﻿ As a benefit, there are no membership fees, monthly service charges, ATM fees, wire fees, and more. Additionally, you’ll receive higher limits on Chase QuickDeposit, Chase QuickPay, daily ATM withdrawals, and debit card purchases.﻿﻿
 
Chase gives consumers a few ways to waive their monthly checking account fees.
 
Chase Bank offers two traditional savings accounts from which to choose. The Chase Savings account has only one interest rate for all balances, while the Chase Premier Savings account provides higher relationship rates for clients with larger balances.﻿﻿ Customers who qualify for Chase Private Client status have access to the Chase Private Client Savings account, which also provides tiered interest rates that are based on how much is in your account.
 
Chase gives consumers a few ways to waive their monthly savings account fees.
 
Chase Bank offers multiple CD terms ranging from one month to 10 years. With larger deposits you may benefit from higher interest rates on your CD. Customers may choose to have their CD interest paid monthly, quarterly, semiannually, annually, or at maturity.
 
To open a CD with Chase Bank, a $1,000 minimum deposit is required. CDs may be opened online or in a branch. However, if you’d like to open a CD with a balance of $1 million or more, you must visit a branch and speak with a banker.
 
If you close your CD before the maturity date, you may incur a penalty. For CDs less than six months, the early withdrawal penalty is 90 days of interest; for CDs from six months to less than 24 months, the penalty is 180 days of interest; and for CDs with terms of 24 months or more, the penalty is 365 days of interest. For all terms, the penalty is not more than the interest earned during the current term of the CD. The minimum penalty is seven days’ interest.
 
Chase Bank offers a wide range of credit cards to suit customers’ goals. Choices include cash back and rewards credit cards for personal and small business customers. The rewards credit cards include numerous co-branded options with airlines, hotels, and other partners.
 
Additionally, Chase offers its own proprietary rewards program: Chase Ultimate Rewards.﻿﻿ These points can be used to book travel, redeem for cash back, transfer to airline and hotel partners, and more.﻿﻿
 
Most credit cards from Chase Bank limit the ability to earn a bonus to once every 24 months from the date the bonus is received. Two exceptions are the Chase Sapphire Preferred and Reserve cards, which limit customers to one bonus once every 48 months.
 
Here are the cards available from Chase Bank:
 
General Travel Rewards Cards (Ultimate Rewards)
 
Co-Branded Rewards Credit Cards
 
Cash-Back Credit Cards
 
Business Credit Cards
 
In addition to the products listed above, Chase Bank has a wide range of other offerings to meet your needs:
 
Customers can discuss their accounts with Chase bankers in person at almost 4,900 branches. Branch hours may vary from state to state, and you can locate the nearest branch to you through the bank’s online branch locator.﻿﻿
 
Additionally, you can access your account over the phone, online, or through the mobile app outside of normal business hours. Secure messages can be sent to customer service 24/7 online or through the mobile app.
 
Telephone support hours vary based on which department you are calling. For personal banking and credit card inquiries, you may call 1-800-935-9935, Monday to Friday from 8 a.m. to 12 midnight ET and Saturday and Sunday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. ET.﻿﻿
 
The Chase Bank mobile app provides a consolidated view of your relationship with the bank. Benefits include facial recognition and fingerprint sign-in, reviewing account activity, and instantly blocking credit card transactions if you’ve misplaced your card. You can also send and receive money through Zelle, pay bills, and deposit checks.
 
If you’re ready to open a Chase Bank account, you can open one online or in one of the almost 4,900 branches across the U.S. For customers who already have a Chase account, you can open another account through its mobile app.
 Chase Bank offers a wide variety of banking, lending, and investment products to its clients. It is the largest financial services company in the U.S., and that shows in its ability to provide products for a range of clients. Chase Bank is suited to a broad spectrum of clients, ranging from students to military veterans and from the average household to private banking relationships. Although its presence may not be robust in every state, customers can open and service accounts online or through its mobile apps. There are several choices when opening a checking account. The accounts do have monthly service fees, but they can be waived when you meet minimum balance requirements or by completing qualifying activities. Premium checking accounts also earn interest and waive some banking fees. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Chase.com. "About Us." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "History of Our Firm." Accessed May 26, 2020. FederalReserve.gov. "Large Commercial Banks." Accessed May 26, 2020. Institute.JPMorganChase.com. "Who We Are." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "A card for every need." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Find a Chase ATM or branch near you: Browse by state." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Chase Checking Accounts: Compare accounts and select the one that fits your needs." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Additional Banking Services and Fees for Personal Accounts Deposit Account Agreement." Page 3. Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Chase Secure Banking." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Chase College Checking." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "OFFERING SPECIAL BANKING PROGRAMS: Personal Banking." Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Banking with Chase Private Client: FAQs: What do I need to qualify to be a Chase Private Client?" Accessed May 26, 2020. Chase.com. "Banking with Chase Private Client: Advantages That Save Time and Money." Accessed May 26, 2020.