
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Chime is a technology company that offers digital banking options for people on the go. Chris Britt and Ryan King created Chime in 2013 as an alternative to traditional banks.
 No monthly fees No overdraft fees Early access to direct deposits Large ATM network Poor savings rate Limited services Difficult to make cash deposits Out-of-network ATM charges 
Chime is a good fit for customers looking for simple banking services with no monthly maintenance fees or minimum balance requirements. Chime allows customers to:
 
Chime keeps its service options simple, with only a two account choices available.
 
Chime offers only one savings option—a high-yield savings account. Chime’s savings account comes with a savings rate of 1.00% APY, which is good but still lower than the best high-yield savings accounts on the market.
 
The savings account comes with two optional automatic savings programs, so customers can reach savings goals faster:
 
Depositing cash into your Chime savings account is not a simple process. It requires a visit to a Green Dot location, where you may face a third-party transfer fee for the service. Customers also have the option to transfer money from their Chime spending account.
 
Chime’s "checking" account is called a spending account and comes with a complimentary Visa debit card. Though it doesn’t come with traditional check writing privileges, you can write checks using the Chime checkbook feature. You simply choose to pay bills through the checkbook feature, and Chime will send a check on your behalf, up to $5,000, typically arriving in three to nine business days. There’s no limit on how many checks you can send per day. This feature is only eligible for checks mailed to recipients in all 50 states and the District of Columbia.
 
Customers can use their debit card without paying a fee at more than 38,000 ATMs across the U.S. There are also no foreign transaction fees charged for using your Chime debit card internationally. Unfortunately, using your debit card at out-of-network ATMs yields a $2.50 charge per transaction. ATM withdrawals are limited to $500 per day.
 
To combat overdraft fees, Chime offers SpotMe, an overdraft protection service that allows eligible customers to avoid overdraft fees on their spending account. SpotMe is available for customers who receive monthly direct deposits totaling at least $500. Chime uses your direct deposit total from the previous 31 days to determine eligibility. Instead of charging a fee, Chime uses your next deposit to cover the overdraft amount.
 Overdrafts through SpotMe are initially limited to $20, but they may be increased up to $100, based on account history and activity. 
Chime embraces mobile banking as evidenced through its mobile phone app, available on iOS and Android. Through the app, customers can:
