
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
CIBC Bank USA is a full-service bank offering consumer and business deposit accounts and other financial services. The bank serves the Midwest region with 23 branches.﻿﻿ It is backed by the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, its parent company based in Toronto, which has 150 years of experience as a global financial institution.﻿﻿
 No monthly fees for all consumer checking accounts Waives up to $50 per month in foreign ATM fees Online-only savings account with a higher interest rate Limited U.S. branch footprint Does not offer 24-hour live customer support on the telephone Current interest rates unavailable online 
CIBC Bank USA is an ideal bank for consumers who:
 
Although CIBC Bank USA is a regional bank with 23 branches, it boasts a suite of consumer and business products to serve client needs thanks to the backing of its parent company. Customers have multiple options for banking accounts, loans, and wealth management. However, credit cards are not currently offered by CIBC. It does provide:
 
There are five checking account types available from CIBC Bank USA. Each of these checking accounts has no monthly service charge and can be opened with an initial deposit of $50 or less.
 
Three checking accounts—iCan, myChoice Plus, and myChoice Prestige—reimburse ATM fees charged by other banks. The iCan and myChoice Prestige accounts refund up to $50 per month, while the myChoice Plus refunds up to $25.
 
EasyPath Access is specifically designed to avoid overdrafts and overdraft fees. The bank stops transactions that would cause your account to be overdrawn. It has no minimum balance requirements and no monthly fees.
 
The HSA Checking account is designed to pair with your high-deductible health plan. The account has no setup fees or annual fees and earns interest on your balances.
 
Customers have a choice between two savings accounts at CIBC Bank USA: CIBC Savings and CIBC Agility Savings.﻿﻿
 
CIBC Savings is a traditional savings account with a low minimum balance requirement that offers unlimited in-person withdrawals. As your balance grows, you have the opportunity to earn a higher interest rate. You must maintain a minimum daily balance of at least $250 in your account each statement cycle, otherwise, you’ll be charged a $3 quarterly fee.
 
The CIBC Agility Savings account is an online-only savings account with no monthly account maintenance fees. To open your account you must have a $1,000 minimum deposit. However, once the account is open, there is no minimum balance requirement.
 
There is only one money market account option at CIBC Bank USA, and the CIBC Money Market can be opened with a minimum deposit of $50. It allows an unlimited number of in-person or ATM withdrawals. Plus, you may have up to six transfers, checks, and debit card transactions each monthly statement cycle.
 
This money market account offers tiered interest rates that reward customers who keep higher balances. If your daily account balance falls below $2,500, there is a charge of $15 per monthly statement cycle.﻿﻿
 
The bank offers CDs with terms ranging from 30 days to five years. Customers can choose between standard CDs and jumbo CDs, depending upon how much they have to deposit. The Agility online CD is also an option for customers outside of the bank’s footprint.﻿﻿
 
Standard and Agility CDs have a minimum deposit of $1,000, while jumbo CDs require a minimum deposit of $100,000. Agility CDs offer a higher rate of interest if your balance is $25,000 or greater.
 
CDs must meet these minimum balances on a daily basis to earn interest. The interest earned may be withdrawn or reinvested. CDs may be used as loan collateral and are automatically renewed at maturity.
 
CIBC Bank USA charges a penalty for early withdrawal before the CD term matures. For CDs of less than one year, the penalty is 90 days of interest. Maturities of 12 months or longer have a penalty of six months of interest. Agility CDs charge an early withdrawal penalty of 30 days.
 
CIBC (USA) does not currently offer credit cards in the U.S.
 
CIBC Bank USA also offers many other banking and investment products:
 
Customers have 24/7 access to their accounts through telephone banking, online banking, and a mobile app for both Apple and Android devices.
 
Live telephone support through the Client Support Center is only available during normal business hours at 877-448-6500. You can reach a customer service agent Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. (CST). Saturday hours are from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. (CST). Live telephone support is not available on Sundays.
 
CIBC Bank USA is not ranked by J.D. Power, but its parent company in Canada received multiple awards in 2019. It ranks highest in overall satisfaction among Canadian credit card mobile apps. Additionally, it ranks second for both overall satisfaction among Canadian banking mobile apps and overall satisfaction for Canadian online banking.﻿﻿
 
The CIBC US Mobile Banking app allows you to pay your bills, deposit checks remotely and supports Apple Pay purchases directly from your device. The US app is currently only rated at 1.9 out of 5 stars on the iOS App Store and 3.2 stars on Google Play.
 
To open an account with CIBC Bank USA, visit one of its 23 branches in Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, or Wisconsin.
 
The CIBC Agility savings account can be opened by anyone in the U.S. You can open the account directly from your home computer.
 CIBC Bank USA offers a broad array of banking and investment products for its clients. Although it is a regional bank based in the Midwest, it is backed by one of the five largest banks in Canada. CIBC Bank USA is best suited for customers that live in one of the four states where it has physical branches. However, the bank also offers an online-only savings account that is a solid option for customers throughout the U.S. Customers looking for a checking account with no monthly maintenance fees and a small opening deposit have four options. Even though CIBC Bank USA only has 28 ATMs, it will refund up to $50 in ATM fees charged by other banks. The amount of ATM refunds received depends on which checking account you have. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
