
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
CIT Bank is an online-only bank that is entirely digital and offers competitive deposit products and home loans. It is owned by CIT, whose history dates back to 1908 when it began by offering business financing in St. Louis.﻿﻿ CIT Bank was launched in 2011 to offer a wide array of banking products completely online because the bank does not have any branches or ATMs. This in-depth review will help you decide if its online deposit accounts are right for you.
 No monthly fees on deposit accounts Refunds ATM fees up to $15 per month Tiered interest rates to encourage higher balances No bank branches or ATMs Limited account options Does not offer 24/7 customer support 
CIT Bank is a good fit for customers who prefer a digital bank offering checking and savings accounts that can be opened online with no fees or minimum balance requirements. It allows digitally savvy customers to:
 
As an online-only bank, CIT Bank offers a limited selection of deposit accounts. Because it is not burdened by the expense of branches and ATMs, it can offer higher rates than traditional bank accounts. CIT Bank also offers relationship pricing on home loans for its customers. On its menu are:
 
CIT Bank offers only one checking account, called “eChecking.”﻿﻿ This account has no monthly fees and can be opened with as little as $100. Accounts receive a debit card with EMV technology. Although CIT Bank does not have any ATMs, customers are refunded up to $15 per month in ATM fees charged by other banks. CIT Bank does not charge customers for using another bank’s ATM.
 
Customers receive interest on their checking account, with no minimum balance requirements. Deposits up to $25,000 receive one interest rate, while customers who maintain $25,000 or more in their account each month will receive a higher interest rate.
 
Customers have two savings account options with CIT Bank: the Savings Builder or Premier High Yield Savings. Both accounts have no monthly service fees and a minimum deposit requirement of $100.﻿﻿
 
The Savings Builder account offers a tiered rate of interest to reward those with higher balances. You can earn the top rate by maintaining a minimum balance of $25,000 or by making at least one deposit of $100 or more each month. The Premier High Yield Savings offers a high rate of interest on all balances without any prerequisites.
 
There is only one money market account at CIT Bank. The CIT Bank Money Market account has no monthly service fees and requires an opening deposit of $100 or more.﻿﻿ CIT Bank will soon release an online bill payment option for its money market account.
 
CIT Bank offers a number of CD options for customers, including term CDs, jumbo CDs, and no-penalty CDs.﻿﻿ Its RampUp CDs are no longer available for new customers.﻿﻿
 
Term CDs offer terms ranging from six months to five years, while jumbo CDs range from two to five years. The no-penalty CD is an 11-month term, but customers can withdraw funds with no penalty. This feature is available at any time starting seven days after making the initial deposit.
 
The minimum opening deposit for a term CD or no-penalty CD is $1,000. Jumbo CDs require a minimum opening deposit of $100,000.
 
Early withdrawal penalties are based on the term of your CD. Terms up to one year have a penalty of three months of simple interest. CDs up to three years have a penalty of six months of interest, while terms of more than three years incur a penalty of 12 months of interest.
 
In addition to deposit accounts, CIT Bank offers the following other services:
 
Customer service at CIT Bank is available six days a week at 1-855-462-2652. Its call center is open Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. EST. On Saturday live phone agents are available from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. EST. The call center is closed on Sundays.﻿﻿
 
Customers have access to their accounts through telephone banking, the CIT Bank website, or its mobile app.
 
The CIT mobile app is available on both Apple and Android devices, and has above four-star ratings on both app stores. With the app, users can
 
CIT also has a text banking feature which allows you to text an alphanumeric command to a phone number and get a response via SMS for a few basic details. You can get responses for a summary of available account balances, recent transactions per account, and a handful of "help" links.
 
To open an account with CIT Bank, apply through its website or mobile app. Because CIT Bank does not have any branches, you cannot walk into a branch to open an account.
 CIT Bank is ideal for the customer who wants low fees, high rates, and doesn’t need access to a branch. All deposit accounts can be opened online without having to speak with anyone. Although the bank doesn’t have its own ATMs, customers are not charged for using ATMs at other banks and refunded up to $15 in fees those banks may charge each month. The checking, savings, and money market accounts have no monthly fees and low opening deposit requirements. Once the accounts are opened, there is no minimum balance required to avoid fees. The no-penalty CD is a nice option for customers to earn a higher rate without locking in their money for an extended period of time.