
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Citibank is a global financial services firm that serves more than 100 million customers in 98 countries around the world. The bank was founded in 1812 in New York City and has since grown to boast more than $74 billion of revenue in 2019.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 Open checking and savings accounts with no minimum deposits World’s largest credit card issuer More than 60,000 fee-free ATMs throughout the U.S. Requirements to waive monthly fees on checking accounts Need checking account to open savings and money market accounts Up to $2.50 charge for using another bank’s ATM 
As a large bank with more than 1,300 branches and almost 6,500 ATMs in the U.S., Citibank offers convenient access to your money. Though it is not the best fit for customers who can’t meet the minimum balance requirements to waive fees, it is best for those who: 
 
As you might expect from a financial services firm of its size, Citibank offers a wide variety of accounts and services.
 
Citibank offers five regular checking account packages and one high-yield package for customers based on their needs. All checking account packages have no minimum opening deposit amount. However, each checking account package charges a monthly service fee if the minimum criteria are not met.
 
You can waive monthly service charges for the Access Account and Basic Banking packages through one of three ways: having a qualifying direct deposit, making a qualifying bill payment, or maintaining a combined average balance of $1,500 or more in eligible linked accounts.
 
These are the checking account packages from which to choose:﻿﻿
 
All five regular checking account packages come with a savings account.﻿﻿ The Citi Accelerate high-yield savings account must also be opened with a Citibank checking account package.﻿﻿ You cannot open this savings account without opening a checking account too.
 
There is no minimum deposit required to open your savings account. This account does not have a monthly service fee and must be part of a Citibank checking package.
 
The Citi Savings Account is a money market account that earns short-term market rates in an account insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Account owners can write checks in all checking packages except the Access Account package. The Citi Savings Account must be part of a Citibank checking package, and it does not have a separate monthly service charge.
 
Citibank offers three certificates of deposit (CD) with unique features. All CDs require a minimum opening deposit of $500, but some offer higher rates for larger balances.
 
The first is a fixed-rate CD with terms ranging from five months to five years. A second option is a Step Up CD, where the rate increases every 10 months. The final option is a no-penalty CD, where you will earn a guaranteed interest rate but can withdraw your balance at any time without a penalty.﻿﻿
 
For CDs of one year or less, there is an early withdrawal penalty of 90 days of simple interest. If a CD matures in more than one year, the penalty is 180 days of simple interest.
 
Citibank is the world’s largest issuer of credit cards, so there are many types of credit cards available for consumers and small business owners. These credit cards offer airline miles, travel rewards, cashback, and Citibank’s proprietary rewards called ThankYou Points. Here are some of the credit cards offered by Citibank.﻿﻿
 
Citi ThankYou Points Cards
 
Cash-Back Credit Cards
 
Travel Rewards
 
Business Credit Cards
 
Citibank also offers many other banking products and services:
 
Your deposit and investment relationship with Citibank can save money on other products. For example, you’ll save money by agreeing to automatically draft your mortgage payment from your Citibank account. You save $250 on mortgage closing costs by having a Citibank account or up to 0.625% off your mortgage interest rate based on your combined balances.
 
Customers can access their accounts through the Citi Mobile app, CitiPhone banking, or Citi text banking. To speak with a live person, you can visit a branch, chat online, or call customer service.
 
On the Citi Mobile app, you can view account balances, make mobile check deposits, find nearby branches or ATMs, and make bill payments. If you are an Apple fan, you can pair the mobile app with your Apple Watch. The app is currently ranked No. 29 in the Finance category on the iOS App Store and has a 4.9-star rating. Similarly, the Google Play version has 4.7 stars.
 
You can also ask general account questions through the Twitter account @AskCiti. However, you must remember not to disclose your Citibank account number or other account access information when Tweeting with @AskCiti.
 
J.D. Power recognized Citibank as the highest in customer satisfaction with retail banking advice in February 2020.﻿﻿
 
Customers can sign up for an account with Citibank in a branch, online, or over the phone. Once your account is open, online banking and its mobile app are available to view transactions, transfer funds, or make bill payments.
 Citibank is one of the largest financial institutions in the world. It offers a variety of account packages to meet your needs, and it has thousands of branches and ATMs at which to access your account. There are no minimum deposit requirements to open checking or savings accounts. However, Citibank accounts are best suited for people who can meet the balance or activity requirements. These customers can waive fees with combined balances and receive discounts with relationship pricing. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Citigroup.com. "Fourth Quarter and Full Year 2019 Results and Key Metrics." Accessed April 14, 2020. Citigroup.com. "New Bank Born in New York." Accessed April 14, 2020. Citigroup.com. "Credit Cards." Accessed April 14, 2020. Citigroup.com. "Citibank Nearly Doubles Fee-Free ATM Network Across the U.S. with New Cardtronics Agreement." Accessed April 14, 2020. Citigroup.com. "Checking with Citi." Accessed April 14, 2020.