
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Citibank was founded in 1812, has a presence in 99 countries, and offers consumer products, including personal loans.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ There are no origination fees, and applicants may be able to borrow up to $30,000.﻿﻿
 
This Citibank personal loans review will provide relevant details so that you can make an educated decision about whether this is the right lender for your needs.
 No origination fees and prepayment penalties Eligible customers can earn rewards points Ability to submit a joint application Currently available to Citibank customers only Loan proceeds only available via check No prequalification option 
For personal loan customers affected by the coronavirus pandemic, Citibank is offering deferral of monthly payments and waiver of late fees for two statement cycles. Accounts in good standing will continue to be reported to the credit bureaus as current during the waiver period.
 
Borrowers can call 1-800-685-0935 Monday–Thursday 8:30 am–to10 pm ET and Friday 8:30 am–to 9 pm ET.
 
Citibank allows its customers to use their loan proceeds for most personal reasons. For example, you can use the money for a wedding, vacation, home renovation, or other types of large purchases. You may also use it to consolidate debt. However, Citibank restricts you from using the loan proceeds for post-secondary education.﻿﻿ 
 
Citibank personal loan applicants will be mailed a check within five business days of loan approval.﻿﻿ 
 
Citibank allows joint applications. Both applicants need to have an eligible Citibank deposit account. One applicant can log into his or her account to fill out an online form. If applying over the phone or in person, both applicants need to be present.
 
Citibank customers can earn ThankYou® points each month when an eligible checking account enrolled in the rewards program is linked to a personal loan. Depending on the type of account and the number of completed required activities, customers may receive up to an extra 125 points each month. 
 
Citibank doesn't offer a prequalification option—you'll need to submit a full application and be subject to a hard credit inquiry. Here's what the application process looks like: 
 
You can also apply by calling customer service at 877-362-9100 or showing up at any Citibank branch. Applicants must go this route for loans higher than $30,000.
 
Currently, Citibank doesn't offer an option to refinance your personal loan. However, you can take out an additional loan if you have an existing one. You'll need to have the account for at least six months before being able to do so. 
 Citibank personal loans are best for existing customers who happen to be interested in receiving relationship bonuses. Depending on the type of deposit account you own, and the kinds of transactions you have, the rewards you'll earn may be worth it. Plus, Citibank offers joint applications to help borrowers increase their chances of getting approved. Unfortunately, if you need funds quickly or haven't been an existing Citibank customer for at least three months, you may need to look elsewhere. Since there is no prequalification option, you won't be able to find out if you qualify until you've been subject to a hard credit inquiry. No matter what, getting the best personal loan for you means taking the time to do some comparison shopping so that you can find the best rates and terms.  