
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
One of the oldest and largest financial institutions in the U.S., Citizens Bank offers a variety of bank products, including personal loans. Those products and the rest of the lending side of the company is branded as Citizens One. The company's personal loan rates can be competitive for those who have good to excellent credit. Those applicants may be able to borrow up to $50,000.﻿﻿
 
Our Citizens Bank personal loan review dives into the details, to help you decide if this lender is a good fit for your financial needs.
 No fees or penalties Discounts for qualified applicants Option to include a co-applicant Strong credit recommended to qualify Inability to change due date Minimum income requirements 
Personal loan borrowers affected by the coronavirus pandemic can request a deferment by calling 1-855-819-7137 if you applied before 7/13/19 or 1-866-999-0107 if you applied after 7/13/19.
 
Citizens Bank lets borrowers use their personal loans for a myriad of purposes. Among them: remodeling projects, debt consolidation, weddings, vacations, and purchasing recreational vehicles. In short, how you use the loan proceeds is mostly up to you.
 
However, Citizens Bank does set some restrictions. You can't be borrowing the proceeds for:  
 
Citizens Bank borrowers will usually receive funds within two business days via an automated clearing house (ACH) payment.
 
Citizens Bank allows joint applications, and both the primary borrower and co-applicant can request separate rate quotes. When submitting a personal loan application, the final rates and terms will be based on whoever has the higher FICO score.
 
Citizens Bank offers what the lender calls its "Rate Quote," a sort of prequalification process that allows you to see rates and terms you may qualify for in advance. It uses a soft credit check, so your credit score won't be impacted until you submit a full application, when Citizens Bank will conduct a hard inquiry (and your score could be affected, at least temporarily).﻿﻿
 
As mentioned above, you can discover whether you're eligible for a Citizens Bank personal loan first, and on what terms, before you apply. Here's what the entire application process looks like, using the bank website. 
 
Once your loan is approved, sign your loan agreement and receive your funds within a few business days in most cases. Prefer a personal touch? You can also apply at any one of the 1,100 Citizen Bank branches in 11 states (they're often in supermarkets) throughout New England, the Mid-Atlantic, and the Midwest. The application process will be similar to what you'll do online.
 
There doesn't seem to be an option to refinance your personal loan with Citizens Bank. However, you can consolidate your personal loan into a new loan. Loans are limited to one open and active loan per borrower.
 A personal loan with Citizens Bank carries no fees and features competitive interest rates, so it's worth a look if you're already shopping around for personal loans. A venerable bricks-and-mortar institution, it's good for borrowers who want to apply for a personal loan in person—though, unfortunately, their physical branches are just in a handful of states. The "Rate Quote" feature is a risk-free way to get a preview of the financing terms for which you might qualify, and it makes it easy to compare options from other lenders without affecting your credit score. However, if your credit score isn't considered in the good range at the very least, you may need to look elsewhere, as Citizens Bank tends to favor those with better credit. 