
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Citizens Bank is a regional bank with almost 1,100 branches across the New England, Mid-Atlantic, and Midwest regions. Headquartered in Providence, R.I., it is one of the nation's oldest and largest financial institutions and offers a wide variety of banking products. The bank also offers online-only savings accounts and certificates of deposit (CDs) through its subsidiary, Citizens Access.﻿﻿
 Large regional bank that offers an array of products Online-only accounts with no monthly fees Liquid CD provides guaranteed rates with no penalty for early withdrawals Branches only available in 11 states Checking accounts have monthly fees unless you meet requirements Limited fee refund for using another bank's ATM 
Citizens Bank is best for customers that live in one of the 11 states where it has branches and ATMs. It is best suited for someone who:﻿﻿
 
Its online bank, Citizens Access, is a good option for anyone in the U.S. Its savings accounts have no monthly service charges but require a $5,000 minimum opening deposit. Citizens Access is worth considering for those who:﻿﻿
 
As a large regional bank, Citizens Bank offers an extensive array of deposit accounts and related services. It serves customers with 1,100 branches and 2,700 ATMs across the regions in which it operates. Additionally, it offers an online savings account through its subsidiary, Citizens Access. It provides:
 
Citizens Bank offers three checking accounts, as well as one dedicated to students:﻿﻿
 
Each has a monthly service charge that can be waived by meeting certain requirements. Making one deposit a month will have the fees waived on the One Deposit Checking account. The Platinum and Platinum Plus checking accounts earn interest on checking balances and waive many types of bank service fees. Students under the age of 25 automatically have their monthly service charges waived.﻿﻿
 
Customers have three savings account options with Citizens Bank. None require a minimum opening balance. Each savings account is designed to pair with its corresponding checking accounts:
 
Monthly service charges for One Deposit Savings accounts are waived with at least one deposit each month. The Platinum Savings and Platinum Plus Savings do not have a monthly service charge.﻿﻿
 
The CollegeSaver savings account is for parents of children who are under 17. For children under 12, if you make monthly deposits every month until your child turns 18, they will receive a $1,000 bonus on their 18th birthday.﻿﻿
 
Citizens Access also offers an online savings account. It offers competitive interest rates with no monthly fees, but there is a minimum deposit requirement of $5,000 to open an account.﻿﻿
 
Citizens Bank offers three money market accounts. All three accounts have no minimum deposit requirements. The three money market options offered are:
 
The Personal Money Market is available to all customers. However, the Platinum Money Market and Platinum Plus Money Market are only available to customers with the corresponding checking accounts.﻿﻿
 
The Personal Money Market requires a minimum daily balance of $2,500 to avoid a $10 monthly service charge. There are no monthly service charges for the Platinum or Platinum Plus Money Market accounts.﻿﻿
 
CDs require a minimum balance of $1,000. Terms available are 11, 14, and 24 months. Some of its CDs offer higher interest rates if you also have a premium checking account.﻿﻿
 
There is a flat fee of $50 plus waived interest for early withdrawals. CDs of less than one year forfeit the greater of 90 days of interest or half of the interest that would have been earned through the remainder of the term. CDs with a term greater than one year forfeit the greater of 180 days of interest or half of the interest to be earned over the remaining term.﻿﻿
 
Additional CD options are available from Citizens Access. These CDs require a minimum opening deposit of $5,000 each. Terms range from one to five years.﻿﻿
 
Citizens Access also provides an 11-month Liquid CD which offers a guaranteed interest rate throughout the term. It allows withdrawals without a penalty.﻿﻿
 
The bank offers two simple credit cards. One is a cash back credit card and the other is a balance transfer credit card:
 
The Cash Back Plus World Mastercard offers unlimited 1.8% cash back on every purchase that you make. There are no rotating categories to remember and you do not have to activate the offer. It has no annual fee, no foreign transaction fees, and no penalty annual percentage rate (APR) for late payments. There's also a 15 billing cycle introductory APR for eligible balance transfers.﻿﻿
 
Those looking for extra time to pay off their balance transfer should consider the Clear Value Mastercard. It offers a longer introductory period for balance transfers and also has no annual fee.﻿﻿
 
Citizens Bank also offers a wide range of banking and investment services for its customers including:﻿﻿
 
Customer service is available Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. (EST). Live agents are also available Saturday and Sunday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. (EST) at 1-800-922-9999. You can also send a secure message through online banking to receive a response during regular business hours. In addition, you can access accounts online or through the bank's mobile app.
 
Online accounts at Citizens Access have a separate phone number for customer service and the hours are different. Live customer service is available Monday to Friday from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. (EST), Saturday from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. (EST), and Sunday from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. (EST).
 
To open an account with Citizens Bank, you can apply online, over the phone, or by visiting a branch. Citizens Access online-only savings accounts and CDs are available on its website.
 Citizens Bank and its online-only subsidiary, Citizens Access, offer a wide variety of banking products and services. People who live in the 11 states that it serves should consider it as a good option. The monthly service charges can be waived with straightforward requirements, and the bank offers relationship pricing across products. Customers with premium checking accounts receive higher interest rates on savings accounts, money market accounts, and CDs. Plus, Citizens Bank provides a 0.125% discount on your mortgage with automatic payment from one of its checking accounts. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Citizens Financial Group, Inc. “About Citizens Financial Group, Inc.” Accessed April 13, 2020. Citizens Bank. “Online & Mobile Banking.” Accessed April 13, 2020. Citizens Access. “Liquid CD.” Accessed April 13, 2020. Citizens Bank. “Checking Accounts.” Accessed April 13, 2020. Citizens Bank. “Branch Locations” Accessed April 16, 2020. Citizens Bank. “ATM Fee for Using Non-Citizens Bank ATM?” Accessed April 13, 2020. Citizens Bank. “Banking and Credit Cards.” Accessed April 13, 2020. Citizens Access. “Online Savings Account.” Accessed April 13, 2020.