
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Costco is a membership club that offers products and services for sale online and in its warehouse locations. Members also receive special discounts, pricing, and benefits through Costco’s partnerships. One of these benefits is Costco car insurance through CONNECT (formerly Ameriprise Auto and Home), a division of American Family Insurance.
 
American Family Insurance was founded in Madison, Wis., in 1927. Since then it has grown into a Fortune 500 company with $31 billion in total assets and $9.7 billion in customer equity. It has been providing Costco auto insurance to members for nearly 20 years. American Family Insurance offers a wide variety of policies, including vehicle, property, business, and life insurance.
 Multiple policy discounts Additional benefits for Costco Executive members Choose your own body shop for repairs High complaint ratio at four times the industry average Car insurance through a third party Limited customer service hours CONNECT by American Family Insurance has provided two rounds of coronavirus relief. Initially, policyholders received a 15% rebate for three months of coverage if you were insured by June 30, 2020. A second round of relief was announced with a 10% discount for the remaining coverage period through Nov. 30, 2020. Checks for the first rebate will be issued in September and the second rebate will be issued in December. These rebates will not affect Costco auto insurance rates in the future, because there has been a reduction in claim costs due to customers driving less. 
Costco auto insurance offers the following types of coverage:
 
Liability coverage includes:
 
Medical coverage includes:
 
Uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage protects you and your vehicle when you are in an accident that is not your fault and the other driver either does not have insurance at all or their insurance does not cover all of the damage. A 2017 study by the Insurance Research Council found that one in eight drivers do not have insurance, so purchasing this coverage may be a good idea.﻿﻿
 
There are two parts of vehicle coverage:
 
By increasing the deductibles on your insurance coverage, you can reduce your annual premiums.
 
Costco auto insurance also offers the following optional coverages for your vehicle:
 
Many factors determine the cost of insurance coverage, and not all companies treat them the same. They include:
 
Costco car insurance allows customers to identify as a man, woman, or nonbinary to reflect the current environment of gender identity. A sample quote for man vs. nonbinary revealed that the nonbinary driver received a slightly lower quote. Marital status options also include civil union and registered domestic partners.
 
These discounts can lower premiums for Costco auto insurance customers.
 
Costco car insurance is available through CONNECT, a division of American Family Insurance. You can purchase insurance directly from CONNECT, but some discounts, benefits, and group pricing for Costco members may not be available. Coverage limits, discounts, and payment options can vary by state.
 
Insurance coverage is not available in all states. Costco Insurance Agency is not licensed in New York state, so customers who live there cannot obtain insurance through Costco. Additionally, residents of Tennessee are not eligible for Costco discounts, and Massachusetts residents must be Costco Executive members to receive Costco discounts.
 
Customer service for Costco car insurance is available by phone, email, and mail. Customer service agents are on call from 5 a.m. to 8 p.m. PT Monday through Friday and on Saturday from 6:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. PT. Customer service is not available on Sunday.
 
Many customer service needs can be handled online through the CONNECT website, such as adding or removing drivers or vehicles, changing your address, and updating your education level. Additionally, CONNECT offers “quick services” that handle the most common tasks without logging into your account, such as updating payment information and requesting a copy of your policy or auto ID card.﻿﻿
 
CONNECT’s parent company, American Family Insurance, has a strong reputation in the insurance industry. AM Best, a credit rating agency for the insurance industry, gave American Family Insurance an A (Excellent) Financial Strength rating, the third highest out of 15 ratings.﻿﻿ AM Best’s Financial Strength rating measures the company’s stability and ability to meet its financial obligations to policyholders. A company with a high rating can be relied upon to pay claims on its policies.
 
In J.D. Power’s 2019 U.S. Auto Claims Satisfaction Study, American Family Insurance was ranked “about average” with a score of 857 out of 1,000.﻿﻿
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) maintains a database of all complaints received about insurance companies. The NAIC publishes ratios comparing the company’s share of complaints versus its share of premiums.
 
The average insurance company has a score of 1.0. Anything above 1.0 indicates that the company has more complaints than average, while a score below 1.0 indicates the reverse. A score of 2.0 means that the company has twice the number of complaints as expected in the market. For 2019 American Family Insurance CONNECT’s complaint ratio was 4.73, which was slightly higher than its 2018 score of 4.37.﻿﻿
 
In addition to providing auto and home policies for Costco members, CONNECT offers the following types of insurance coverage:
 
You can make a claim 24 hours a day, seven days a week on Costco car insurance policy by calling 888-404-5365. Certain types of losses may also be reported online. To report a claim, you will be asked to answer these questions:
 
After you provide this information, you’ll be assigned a claims adjuster within one business day. This person will confirm your coverage, deductible, and facts of the loss. The adjuster may ask you to provide before and after photos, a police report (if one was filed), and medical authorization forms.
 
To repair your vehicle, you can choose your own body shop or, if you need it, Costco auto insurance may help you find one. The repairs will begin as soon as your auto insurance claim has been processed.
 
You may cancel your Costco auto insurance at any time without paying a cancellation fee. To do so, follow these steps:
 
To price out Costco auto insurance, you can call 855-531-9253 or request a quote online at the Costco website. Some states, such as Tennessee, do not allow online quotes and require you to call and speak with a live agent. Requesting a quote online is a popular option, because you can change coverages and deductibles quickly to see how they affect premiums.
 
Be prepared to provide the following information to receive your quote:
 
Although Costco members may receive certain discounts and benefits from CONNECT, an American Family Insurance company, these companies are separate from Costco and may not provide the same level of service. Before purchasing a policy, obtain quotes from several car insurance providers to find the right coverage for your situation and a price that fits your budget.
 Costco members receive additional perks and discounts through the Costco car insurance program. To date, more than 400,000 Costco customers have switched their home and auto insurance to CONNECT. Plus, nearly nine out of 10 Costco members renew their policy, which indicates a high satisfaction rate among policyholders. You can get a quote and purchase your policy online or over the phone. However, once your policy is in effect, limited customer service hours may frustrate some customers. Between CONNECT and its parent company, American Family Insurance, Costco members have a variety of coverage options to address all of their insurance needs. Partnering with a financially strong insurance company to provide exclusive member benefits makes Costco auto insurance an attractive option for its members. 
Investopedia is dedicated to furnishing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of car insurance providers. We reviewed each insurance provider's coverage options, available discounts, customer services, and satisfaction ratings to ensure that our content helps users make the right insurance decision for their needs.
 Insurance Research Council. "One in Eight Drivers Uninsured." Accessed Sept. 4, 2020.