
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Credit One Bank is an online-only bank that exclusively offers credit cards. It is a technology and data-driven financial services company that is based in Las Vegas. The bank offers American Express, Mastercard, and Visa credit cards to millions of customers across the United States. This in-depth review can help you decide if Credit One Bank’s products are right for you.
 Credit cards to help build credit Rewards cards earn up to 5% cash back Minimum credit line of $300 High interest rates Variable annual fees based on creditworthiness (up to $99) Foreign transaction fees of 3% 
Credit One is best for consumers who are looking for a credit card to rebuild their credit and want the option to earn rewards on their purchases. Additionally, these customers should be satisfied with their current bank for deposit accounts and lending products, as Credit One does not offer checking, savings, and other deposit accounts, nor does it provide other lending solutions, such as mortgages or home equity loans and lines of credit.
 
The only product that Credit One offers is consumer credit cards. Its seven cards are geared toward consumers who are rebuilding their credit.﻿﻿ At this time Credit One does not offer business credit cards. Some credit cards offer cash back rewards and bonuses for spending on certain products or up to a maximum dollar amount each year.
 
Credit cards for rebuilding credit:
 
Rewards credit cards with bonus offers:
 
Customers are able to receive current account information at any time of day or night through the Credit One website, its mobile app, or automated telephone banking. Live customer support is available from 5 a.m. to 7 p.m. PST Monday through Friday at 1-877-825-3242. Weekend support is available from 6:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday.﻿﻿
 
The Credit One mobile app allows you to schedule payments, check balances and available credit, view your free Experian credit report, and more. It is available on both the iOS App Store and Google Play where both versions currently have a user rating of 4.6 stars or higher on more than 700,000 reviews. The app is currently ranked 39th overall in Finance apps on the App Store.
 
To apply for a credit card with Credit One, the easiest method is through its website at CreditOne.com, where you can respond to a preapproved offer received by mail or check on your application status. You can also see if you’re preapproved for any credit cards without submitting a formal credit report inquiry. If you’re not preapproved, you can submit a formal application for the card of your choice.
 Credit One is a credit card lender whose products are geared toward consumers who are rebuilding their credit. Although some credit cards offer rewards, consumers with above-average credit can find more-rewarding credit card options at other banks. The bank does not offer any other deposit or lending products, and none of its products are available for businesses. Keep your existing bank, or look for another one, to meet your deposit account and other lending needs. If you need to rebuild your credit, Credit One is a good place to start. You’ll receive at least a $300 credit line if approved, and none of its credit cards have an annual fee higher than $99. Interest rates are higher than average, which provides an incentive for customers to pay off their balance in full each month to avoid being charged interest on purchases. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 CreditOneBank.com. "DISCLOSURES AND TERMS & CONDITIONS FOR CREDIT ONE BANK'S CREDIT CARDS AND CREDIT PROTECTION PROGRAM: MINIMUM CREDIT LINE." Accessed April 20, 2020. CreditOneBank.com. "DISCLOSURES AND TERMS & CONDITIONS FOR CREDIT ONE BANK'S CREDIT CARDS AND CREDIT PROTECTION PROGRAM: Transaction fees." Accessed April 20, 2020. CreditOneBank.com. "Choosing a Credit Card." Accessed April 20, 2020. CreditOneBank.com. "Platinum Visa for Rebuilding Credit." Accessed April 20, 2020. CreditOneBank.com. "NASCAR Credit Card." Accessed April 20, 2020.