
A credit review—also known as account monitoring or account review inquiry—is a periodic assessment of an individual’s or businesses' credit profile. Creditors—such as banks, financial services institutions, credit bureaus, settlement companies, and credit counselors—may conduct credit reviews. Businesses and individuals must go through a credit review to become eligible for a loan or to pay for goods and services over an extended period.
 
The primary purpose of a credit review in the eyes of creditors is three-fold: 1) to determine if the potential borrower is a good credit risk; 2) examine a prospective borrower's credit history, and 3) reveal potentially negative data.
 
A credit review is a tool for examining someone's ability to repay a debt. Extending credit depends on the lender's confidence in the borrower's ability and willingness to pay back a loan; or pay for the goods purchased, plus interest, in a timely fashion. As a consumer, your credit report can mean the difference between being approved or denied for a loan.
 
Your credit history is your financial track record that shows how you have managed credit and made payments over time. This history appears in your credit reports from the three main U.S. credit bureaus, Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion, which contain information from lenders that have extended you credit previously; including your payment history with each creditor and the credit limits or loan amounts associated with each creditor. Your credit history is captured into a single number known as a credit score.
 
A credit review also can unearth any potentially negative information about your financial history—such as bankruptcy filings and monetary judgments—that is contained in public records.
 If you are facing a credit review, know what is in your credit report. You might be able to identify and mitigate any potentially damaging data before you apply for a loan or a job. 
Few things in life follow you as your credit report does. Your credit report is a financial snapshot that presents you to the business world. Other parties view it—generally with your permission—and so, of course, should you. By law, you are entitled to review the information in your credit report annually, and doing so does not affect your credit score.
 
Your financial history can affect how easily you can buy or rent a home; make big-ticket purchases like cars, appliances, and jewelry and pay over time; take out loans, and in some industries even get hired. Achieving and maintaining good credit requires work and attention to detail. Checking your credit report regularly can help to ensure that it paints an accurate picture of your finances.
 
You want to make sure that your credit report does not contain any errors or negative surprises. If you do find errors, then you may correct them with the credit bureaus. If your credit history contains data that reflect you poorly, but which is true, then you should be aware of the issues so that you may explain them to potential lenders instead of being caught off guard.
 
You need to review your reports from all three credit bureaus—Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion—because the information between them may vary. Each credit bureau allows consumers one free credit report annually, through AnnualCreditReport.com. Credit reporting agencies allow information to fall off of your credit report in time. Typically, negative information falls off after seven years, except for bankruptcies, which stay on your report for 10 years.
 
It's important to know your FICO score, too, and to check it from time to time. Having a good score increases your odds of getting approved for a loan and helps with the conditions of the offer, such as what the interest rate will be. Furthermore, having a low FICO score can be a deal-breaker for many lenders.
 
Whether an individual applying for a mortgage or home equity line of credit (HELOC), or a small business applying for a loan, banks generally collect similar types of data in a credit review. When both lender and borrower are businesses, much of the evaluation consists of analyzing the borrower's balance sheet, cash flow statements, inventory turnover rates, debt structure, management performance, and the current market conditions.
 
Most prospective lenders will concentrate on the following fundamental characteristics:
