
It often doesn’t make sense to pay an annual fee for a credit card. Plenty of credit cards are offered with no annual fee, and consumers often can't justify paying an annual fee in terms of rewards or benefits that might be offered in exchange. Occasionally, however, a card offers benefits that truly justify the cost of an annual fee. Here are four circumstances in which the expense might be worth it, depending on the individual's spending habits and travel patterns.
 
An annual fee used to be quite common on all credit cards in previous decades and. helped card issuers to be profitable. They have become less common in today's credit card market and typically only exist at the two extreme ends of the market - the premium travel card market (for cards that offer large bonuses, hefty rewards earning structures and premium travel benefits) and the subprime market (for those with bad credit that can't get large credit lines or have any other credit options). So, the annual fees of today are charged in exchange for exceptional value for the well-heeled or for mere access to credit for the low end of the market.
 
Many credit cards offer substantial incentives to get you to open an account. Common rewards include enough frequent flyer miles to earn a roundtrip airline flight, a generous statement credit that offsets some of your purchases, or points that can be redeemed for gift cards or travel expenses.
 
Obviously, if the annual fee is $100 and the bonus is worth $100, there’s little reason to apply. But if the annual fee is $125 and the incentive is $655 worth of airfare, you might want to take a second look. The Citi ThankYou Premier Card has been known to offer such opportunities.
 
For example, one promotion offered 60,000 ThankYou points, which could be redeemed through the ThankYouTravelCenter for $750 worth of travel expenses. Cardholders must spend $4,000 within three months of opening the account to get the points. The net benefit is $655 after the $95 annual fee (waived for the first 12 months).
 
It’s pretty easy to find a credit card that offers 1% cashback on all purchases, or that offers a higher cashback percentage in categories that change from month to month. What’s not so easy to find is a credit card that offers a high percentage of cashback, month in and month out, on necessary purchases. To get a deal like this, you’ll likely have to pay an annual fee, but depending on your household’s spending habits, you could come out far ahead.
 
The American Express Blue Cash Preferred card, for example, offers 6% cash back at U.S. supermarkets (up to $6,000 of purchases) and 3% back at U.S. gas stations, as well as 3% back at certain department stores and 1% back on everything else in exchange for a $95 annual fee. If your family spends $500 a month on groceries (or $6,000 a year), 6% cash back would give you $360 a year, for a net benefit of $265. If you spend a lot on gas, the card becomes an even better deal.
 
If your travel patterns align with the incentives offered by a particular credit card, rewards can be substantial. For example, if you frequently stay at Marriott hotels, you could be earning numerous free hotel stays with the Marriott Bonvoy Brilliant American Express card. This card has a hefty annual fee of $450 but offers a $300 credit annually for purchases at Marriott hotels.
 
After opening an account, cardholders are also credited with 75,000 bonus Marriott Bonvoy points (estimated value of $600) after making $3,000 in purchases within the first three months. Cardholders also get six Marriott Bonvoy reward points for every dollar of purchases at hotels, three points for spending at U.S. restaurants and flights, and two points on other eligible purchases. The card also offers a free night stay at Marriott hotels annually. Taking all of these rewards into consideration, it's no surprise that the Marriott Bonvoy Brilliant American Express card is among the best rewards cards available.
 Credit card deals are always changing; that's why it pays to shop around and read the fine print before opening a new account. 
If you have poor credit, are trying to rebuild your credit score, and the only card you can get approved for has an annual fee, the fee could be money well spent. A better credit score can mean the difference between being approved for a loan or not. It can also mean substantial savings on your loan because people with higher credit scores generally qualify for lower interest rates. The key is to pay the annual fee only while you’re working toward a higher credit score. Once you’ve arrived, switch to a different card that doesn’t carry a fee.
 
If you fail to pay your balance in full every month or if you have a habit of making late payments, penalties, fees, and interest will probably overshadow any benefits you see from a credit card with a high annual fee. In other words, don’t expect to benefit from these deals unless you’re extremely responsible with credit. Also, keep in mind that if you must spend more than you otherwise would have to get these deals, they aren’t really deals.
 
Before you sign up for any credit card with an annual fee, calculate whether it really offers a net benefit in your specific situation. And think about the consequences before deciding to enter a new credit card agreement.
