
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Looking for a debt consolidation loan with bad credit can be tricky. Even if you qualify for one, it may not be at the most competitive interest rates. That doesn’t mean you can’t find a loan and pay down your debts faster. It means you need to take a more careful look at such things as the cost of borrowing, including fees and penalties, loan duration, and how much interest you’ll pay overall.
 
Upgrade is an online lender founded in 2017 and based in San Francisco. We rated it as the overall best lender because it offers competitive rates, fast funding, and the ability to add a cosigner. What also stands out about Upgrade are the tools it has for helping borrowers to monitor their credit and improve their overall credit situation. Rates start at 7.99%, and the maximum amount you can borrow is $35,000.
 Co-signers allowed Prequalification available Funds available as soon as the next business day Low maximum loan amount compared with other lenders An origination fee of up to 8% Late fee if a payment isn’t made within 15 days of the due date 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Upgrade 
 
Avant is an online personal loan lender that stands out because of fast funding times, the ability to refinance your loan, and minimal fees. However, it’s our runner up because of its higher starting interest rates—annual percentage rates (APRs) start at 9.95%. As with Avant, borrowers can receive up to $35,000, and there is a prequalification option. This allows you to check whether you are likely to qualify without incurring a hard credit inquiry, which can lower your credit score temporarily.
 Prequalification available No early or prepayment penalties Funding times as soon as the next business day Maximum loan amount lower compared with other lenders Administrative, late, and dishonored payment fees Higher minimum APR compared with other lenders on our list 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Avant 
 
First Tech Federal Credit Union offers competitive personal loans for less than stellar credit, with rates starting at 7.70%. Though PenFed Credit Union also offers loans from $500 to $50,000, what stands out about First Tech is that its loan terms are longer, with a maximum of 84 months. As with all credit unions, you need to become a member, which you can do by joining the Financial Fitness Association or Computer History Museum. 
 Wide range of loan amounts, with one of the lowest and highest on our list of lenders No application fees, origination fees, or prepayment penalties Ability to apply with a cosigner No prequalification available Must be a member of the credit union to receive a loan Charges a $25 late fee 
Other important information:
 
A division of Quicken Loans, Rocket Loans offers debt consolidation loans with rates as low as 7.161% with automatic payments and funding as soon as the same business day. Although it offers a higher minimum loan amount compared with other lenders, you can lower your rate if you sign up for automatic loan payments.
 Funding as soon as the same business day  Prequalification available Rate discount when opting into autopay No co-signers allowed Origination fee charged Higher minimum loan amount compared with other lenders 
Other important information:
 
PenFed Credit Union offers personal loans that you can use for debt consolidation, with loan amounts starting as low as $500. Rates are competitive, which is rare for loans with a low minimum credit score requirement. Although you do need to become a member to receive funding, doing so is less restrictive than with other credit unions. You can become a PenFed member simply by joining either the Voices for America’s Troops or the National Military Family Organization.
 No origination fees or prepayment penalties Co-signers allowed Wide range of repayment terms Must be a member of PenFed Extra fee to receive funds by the next business day No prequalification option 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: PenFed 
 
Getting a debt consolidation with bad credit may limit your choices, but it’s not impossible to find a lender. First, it’s a good idea to check your credit score to see where you stand, then look for lenders that have lower credit requirements to increase your chances of getting approved.
 
Even though your options may be limited, you’ll want to shop around and compare lenders to see who will offer you the best rates and terms. Then compare that to what rates you’re currently paying with existing debt to see whether it’s worth it to make the switch.
 
Credit unions and online lenders tend to offer better rates for those with poor credit. Credit unions are great if you’re interested in in-person service, but in most cases you’ll need to become a member (usually by paying an annual fee or opening a savings account) in order to be approved for a loan.
 
Online lenders, on the other hand, typically don’t require that you become a member while offering the same types of customer service online or on the phone. However, if you’re not comfortable with managing and paying your loan online, then this may not be the best choice.
 
Typically, the higher your credit score, the better your chances of getting a debt consolidation loan. Even though the lenders on our list require a minimum credit score of either 580 or 600, you may need to meet other requirements, such as a certain annual income and debt-to-income ratio limits, to be approved.
 
In addition to shopping around for debt consolidation loans, one of the best ways to be approved for a competitive rate is to add a cosigner. This ideally should be someone with a good credit profile, one better than yours, whom you trust and who understands the responsibilities and consequences of cosigning a loan. Otherwise, you can work to improve your debt-to-income ratio by increasing your income or further paying down your debt before submitting an application.
 
Here are a few options, each with its own pros and cons.
