
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Disney Premier Visa is aimed at those who love all things Disney and want benefits related to Disney locations and merchandise. Earn 2% in Disney Rewards Dollars on purchases made at gas stations, grocery stores, restaurants and most Disney locations. There is an annual fee of $49.
 Earn a $200 Statement Credit after you spend $500 on purchases in the first 3 months from account opening. The Disney Premier Visa Card The is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Special financing on Disney vacations One-time statement credit Enhanced rewards on common card purchases Savings on select Disney purchases Annual fee Foreign transaction fee No balance transfer offer 
The Disney Premier Visa credit card is best for those who plan to use it for Disney vacations. For those loyal to Disney, and who spend time vacationing in Disney resorts, this card can be a decent choice. The special financing for certain Disney vacation packages can help make paying for a vacation more manageable. Plus, the fact that Disney Rewards Dollars can be redeemed for a statement credit for airline travel makes it possible to use the Disney Premier Visa to plan various aspects of a Disney trip. For those who like buying Disney and Star Wars merchandise, the discount on select purchases can also be a draw. 
 
For those that want to use a card specifically for helping them make Disney vacations more of a reality, the Disney Premier Visa might be a good choice in helping them reach their goals.
 
The Disney Premier Visa offers a one-time statement credit of $200 after the new cardholder spends at least $500 in the first three months of opening. This compares favorably with the American Express Blue Cash Everyday card, which offers a bonus for new cardholders that is worth up to $300. (However, the Amex Blue Cash Everyday card has no annual fee.)
 
Rewards are earned in Disney Rewards Dollars. This is a tiered rewards program, which allows you to earn 2% of the purchase price in Disney Rewards Dollars when used at gas stations, grocery stores, restaurants and at most Disney locations. This enhanced earning on regular purchases can be one way to earn Disney Rewards Dollars faster.
 
Disney Rewards Dollars can be redeemed at Disney locations in the United States. In order to redeem your Disney Rewards Dollars at Disney parks and with the Disney Cruise Line, you need to first order a Disney Rewards Redemption card. You can transfer your earned Disney Rewards Dollars to your Redemption card and then use that card at eligible Disney locations to pay for purchases.
 
It’s also possible to redeem Disney Rewards Dollars for a statement credit related to airline purchases. In this case, rather than moving the rewards to the Disney Rewards Redemption Card, they are redeemed directly with Chase for the purpose of a statement credit on airline purchases made with the Disney Premier Visa. 
 
Finally, cardholders can redeem their Disney Rewards Dollars with AMC Theatres to purchase tickets for Disney, Disney-Pixar, or Star Wars movies. The Rewards Dollars need to be transferred to the Disney Rewards Redemption card and that must be selected as the payment method when buying those movie tickets.
 
There aren’t many transfer opportunities with the Disney Premier Visa, since the rewards are meant to be used with Disney properties. The closest is the ability to redeem Disney Rewards Dollars for statement credit related to airline purchases. If you make an airline purchase with the Disney Premier Visa, you can manage your rewards in your Chase account and use your Disney Rewards Dollars to get a statement credit for the airline purchase.
 
The best way to maximize rewards from the Disney Premier Visa is to focus on earning for Disney-related rewards.
 
By using the Disney Premier Visa for everyday purchases like groceries, gas and restaurants, it’s possible to earn Disney Rewards Dollars a little bit faster. For example, the average consumer spent $4,464 on groceries in 2018 and $3,459 on food away from home, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Additionally, the average consumer spent $2,109 on gas in 2018. All of those purchases could potentially add up to 2% in Disney Rewards Dollars—amounting to about $200.64 in rewards. 
 
Earning 1% in Disney Rewards Dollars on other purchases would only increase the rewards amount received as a result of using the Disney Premier Visa for all purchases.
