
This may come as a surprise to many people, but not everyone needs to file a federal tax return. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has threshold levels for tax return requirements just like tax brackets. Whether or not you need to file is primarily based on your level of gross income and status for the tax year. However, keep in mind that even if you aren’t required to file because of your gross income, you may still be eligible for a refund.
 
Status and gross income will be the primary factors for determining whether or not you are required to file federal taxes. The IRS has the following requirements:﻿﻿
 
Notes and updates for future years can be found in Publication 17 and Publication 501 from the IRS.
 
It’s important to note that 65 is a key age for seniors. Also, any married individual filing separately who earns more than $5 must file a return.﻿﻿ Overall there is no minimum age set for filing taxes, so tax returns are all primarily about income and tax status.
 
There can be some special considerations for dependents under the age of 19 or dependents who are full-time students under the age of 24. The IRS provides the following details for dependents, also from Publications 17 and 501:﻿﻿
 
Additional details on dependents can also be found in in Publication 929.
 The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, signed into law by the president on March 27, 2020, has pushed the deadline for filing federal taxes from April 15 to July 15, 2020. Many states have followed suit, but not all, so be sure to check yours. 
The majority of U.S. states also take taxes from income, so it can be important to know your state tax requirements as well. Most states will require that you file a state tax return if you file a federal return. Specific requirements for each state can be found through TurboTax. If you earned income from a job in a different state than your primary residence, or if you lived in multiple states during the tax year, you may need to file multiple state returns.
 
Many tax filers that fall below the income threshold may be able to receive a refund through their tax filing, which can make filing beneficial. Refunds are available for W-2 employees and others who have had tax withheld from their paycheck during the year. The government also offers a few tax credits for low-income individuals that may provide you with some money back at tax time.﻿﻿
 
If taxes have been withheld from your payroll during the year, and your gross income falls below the tax thresholds, you can be eligible to get that money back. Like for all taxpayers, knowing the credits you are eligible for can also help you during tax season.
 
The earned income credit (EIC) is the most popular tax credit for low-income earners. You must be between ages 25 and 65 to qualify for it. The EIC will vary depending on your income, tax status, and dependents, with more dependents providing you with a higher credit. For single filers with no children, the maximum credit is $529 for 2019, rising to $538 in 2020. For filers with three or more children, the maximum credit is $6,557 for 2019, climbing to $6,660 in 2020.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Some other credits to consider for low income individuals include:
 If you are required to file federal taxes but fail to do so, you could be on the hook for some expensive penalties. 
If your income is above the specified thresholds, you are expected to file and pay necessary taxes to the government. If you have a substantial tax obligation and do not file, the IRS can contact you. Generally, the IRS will provide clear notification of your obligations and all unpaid taxes will accrue penalties. Here is how they are calculated:﻿﻿
 
In some cases there may be additional considerations for annual tax filings. Below are some of the scenarios that may require a tax filing, even if you are below the threshold.
 
Understanding the IRS’s annual threshold limits is a primary factor in determining whether or not you must file a tax return each year. Most individuals will have similar tax scenarios from year to year, which can be helpful in knowing and understanding your tax obligations.
 
However, some people may experience drastic changes from year to year as a result of a drop in income from a lost job, a marriage, new children, or even a jump in income when moving beyond dependency or higher education. The IRS provides detailed information each year for every scenario, so the key is staying up to date on the requirements relative to your personal situation. You should always maintain a record of your returns for up to six years.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 501 (2019), Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information." Accessed April 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 501 (2018), Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 501 (2018), Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 596 (2018), Earned Income Credit (EIC)." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Earned Income Tax Credit Income Limits and Maximum Credit Amounts." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "The Premium Tax Credit - The Basics." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Savings Contributions Credit (Saver’s Credit)." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Get Ready for Taxes: Important things to know about tax credits." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Common Penalties for Individuals." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Self-Employed Individuals Tax Center." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - Required Minimum Distributions (RMDs)." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "About Form 4137, Social Security and Medicare Tax On Unreported Tip Income." Accessed Jan. 15, 2020.