
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
A subsidiary of Navient, Earnest is an online personal loan lender founded in 2013. Offering loans "to financially responsible people," Earnest features competitive interest rates as low as 5.99% with no origination fees. Applicants can use the personal loan proceeds toward most purposes, and in cases of financial hardship, Earnest may be able to offer assistance.
 
This Earnest personal loan review will offer you important details, including rates, fees, and whether it’s the right fit for your lending needs.
 No Fees Competitive Interest Rates Financial Hardship Assistance Not Available in All States Good Credit History Needed No Joint Applications As of April 20th, 2020, Earnest is currently not accepting new applications for personal loans. 
Earnest personal loan borrowers can get up to three months of postponed payments through disaster forbearance. Interest will continue to accrue during the forbearance but will not be capitalized.﻿﻿
 
Earnest's response time is currently 10 days and any payments due will still be required until forbearance is approved.
 
Earnest allows you to use your personal loan for a variety of reasons. These can include consolidating credit card debt, relocation expenses, home improvement projects, medical expenses, vacation costs, and wedding expenses.﻿﻿
 
Basically, you can use Earnest’s personal loans for any reason other than those specifically restricted, which include paying for school expenses at an accredited institution, business purposes, or buying or investing in real estate, including mortgages (though security deposits for rented residences are acceptable).﻿﻿  
 
After submitting your personal loan application, Earnest will review it and reach a decision within five to 10 business days.﻿﻿ 
 
Once your loan is approved and you sign all necessary paperwork, Earnest will transfer the funds by the next business day. It should arrive in your account within one to two business days.﻿﻿ 
 
Here’s what you can expect from the Earnest application process:
 
You can expect a decision within five to 10 business days. 
 
Earnest doesn’t allow refinancing for personal loans.
 Borrowers who have a good credit profile—a minimum 680 credit score and a history of good financial behavior—will be able to take advantage of Earnest’s personal loans. “Good financial behavior” includes things such as a history of on-time debt payments, two months’ worth of savings to cover expenses, and no recent bankruptcy or foreclosure on your record. With its prequalification process—soft credit pulls so your credit score won’t be affected until you submit a full application—Earnest in effect offers you a preview of what sort of loan rates and terms it’ll offer you.  However, if you’re not a solid financial citizen, you won’t be able to take advantage of Earnest’s low-interest rates, lack of fees, and other desirable, highly competitive features. And Earnest currently doesn’t allow the option of submitting a joint application—a courtesy other lenders extend to borrowers whose applications could benefit from a boost.  
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Earnest. "Your Earnest Loan and Coronavirus (COVID-19.)" Accessed May 3, 2020.