
An earnings withholding order is a court order issued by a judge that instructs an employer to garnish wages from one of their employees. These notices are issued when creditors have succeeded in obtaining a legal judgment against a debtor, who in this case is the employee. 
 
The order effectively instructs a third party to deduct payments directly from a debtor’s paycheck or bank account in order to satisfy a ruling.
 
Default risk is an inescapable component of lending. After all, there can never be any guarantee that a borrower will repay their debts in a complete or timely manner. In the case of consumer lending, borrowers can avoid paying their debts by taking actions such as changing their address or bank information, relocating to a different state, or simply refusing to respond to a creditors’ communications. This risk is especially pronounced when the debt in question is not collateralized, leaving the creditor with limited options to enforce repayment.
 
In order to obtain repayment of outstanding debt, a court can allow creditors to seize funds directly from the debtor’s wages or bank account. To do so, a credit must present their case in front of a judge and obtain a legal judgment against the borrower. If they are successful in their case, the court can send an earnings withholding order to the borrower’s employer, informing them that they are legally obligated to deduct a specified sum from the borrower’s paycheck and forward it on to a specified levying officer. The debtor's employer must then act on the court’s behalf by deducting the funds from the employee’s paycheck and forwarding them to a third party known as the levying officer.
 
Unless the unpaid debt in question is particularly small, the earnings withholding order will likely specify an ongoing series of payments to be garnished gradually from the employee’s regular income stream. This legal document will also include various details necessary to establish the legality of the order as well as the specific instructions for its implementation. These include the name, address, and jurisdiction of the court issuing the order; the name and address of the levying officer; the name and address of the employee in question, and that of their attorney, if applicable; the name of the creditor; the court case number, and the date at which the order was issued.
 
In California, state laws dictate that the percentage of an employee’s wages that can be garnished must depend on that employee’s disposable income. In this context, “disposable income” is defined as what remains after deducting federal and state income taxes from their salary, as well as social security and state disability taxes. Importantly, other fixed costs, such as healthcare premiums or court-ordered spousal or child support payments, are not subtracted before determining disposable income.
 
By way of example, California’s wage garnishment laws states, as of 2018, that an employee with monthly disposable income of $942.50 or less would not be eligible for any garnishment of wages. However, an employee with disposable income between $942.51 and $1,256 per month could have the portion in excess of $942.50 garnished—in other words, they could surrender up to $313.49. For employees with monthly disposable incomes greater than $1,256.01, up to 25% of their total disposable income can be garnished per paycheck.
