
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Earnin is an app that allows users to get an advance on a part of their paycheck—though the company stresses that such advances are not payday loans. Earnin doesn't charge interest or fees, though you can support the company by tipping what you think is fair. The app also offers a few other features not normally provided by other traditional personal loan lenders. 
 
Our Earnin personal loan review provides all the relevant details you need to make an educated decision about whether or not to get one.
 No fees, including origination, late or prepayment penalties Offers features like overdraft protection to help your future financial health Ability for borrowers to receive funds within seconds Loan limit very low compared to traditional personal loan lenders Not all banks are available in Earnin’s Lightning Speed feature Maximum loan amounts may differ from depending on financial health 
Earnin typically requires proof of active employment by using GPS to confirm you're at work or through picture verification of your timesheet. To accommodate the millions of Americans affected by the coronavirus pandemic, Earnin has made a one-time exception to these restrictions.
 
Members can now Cash Out as long as they have a copy of employer notification saying you're approved to work at home or that you are not working but still getting paid by the employer. The member must have had at least one successful cash-out and restore debit and received direct deposits for the last three consecutive pay periods.
 
There are two main types of loans Earnin offers:
 
Earnin users can receive loan proceeds within seconds if they link their debit cards from a participating bank with the app. Otherwise, the money should arrive in your bank account within two business days.﻿﻿ 
 
Earnin will let you use most of its features free. You can pay it forward and help out the company by tipping an amount of your choosing.﻿﻿
 
Earnin offers a "Boost" feature where you can ask another community member to increase your maximum loan amount. If approved, you'll receive a $50 temporary increase, which expires at your next pay period.﻿﻿
 
Earnin's Health Aid feature lets community members upload photos of medical bills to submit for review.﻿﻿ Earnin will then help you negotiate the total balance and available payment plan options. You can submit more than one bill, and Earnin will update you within two business days.
 
Once enrolled, members can earn from 1% to 10% cashback at participating retailers just by using their linked debit or credit card. Cashback rewards will be deposited into your bank account once you redeem them.﻿﻿
 
Here's how you can register to start using Earnin.
 
You can't refinance a personal loan with Earnin, as you'll pay back all proceeds within the next pay period.
 Earnin is best for borrowers who need small amounts of cash to cover unexpected expenses or fall a bit short on paying their bills. It's also a great fit if you want to take out a short-term loan and use your next paycheck to pay it back without resorting to expensive payday loans.  However, if you want to be able to cover a large expense and have a decent credit score, you may want to consider alternatives, such as other traditional personal loan lenders. Some of these competitors may charge fees to take out loans, so make sure to shop around, paying particular attention to costs such as interest rates and origination fees.  
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Earnin.com. "Balance Shield." Accessed April 11, 2020.