
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  ELFI 
Our Take
 
At $10,000 per academic year, ELFI has the highest minimum loan amount of any other private student loan we’ve reviewed but its interest rates are about the same as other lenders. ELFI may be a good choice for graduate students but undergraduates will definitely want to look at other options.
 Dedicated personal loan advisor Completely digital Prequalification available High minimum loan amount No co-signer release option High credit score required  ELFI 
Education Loan Finance (ELFI) is a division of SouthEast Bank, a not-for-profit bank with more than three decades of experience in the student loan industry, created to provide lower-cost student loan options to borrowers nationwide. Known mostly for student loan refinancing, ELFI started offering undergraduate, graduate, and parent student loans in August 2019.
 
For borrowers experiencing financial hardship due to the coronavirus pandemic, ELFI recommends contacting their loan servicer, American Education Services, to explore options for deferment or forbearance. The company is offering affected borrowers up to 90 days of disaster forbearance.﻿﻿
 
Students enrolled at least half time in a bachelor’s degree program can qualify for an undergraduate student loan from ELFI.
 
Graduate students in any field, including healthcare professions, law school, and MBA programs, are eligible for an ELFI graduate student loan.
 
Parents can take out a loan for both undergraduate and graduate students. ELFI doesn’t offer a 15-year term for its parent loan, but all other requirements and features are the same.
 Parent loans for college are only available in 5, 7 and 10-year terms. 
Students must be enrolled at least half time in a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree program to qualify for ELFI student loans. Both borrowers and cosigners need to be the age of majority at the time of the loan application and a U.S. citizen or permanent resident alien without conditions.
 
There are financial requirements as well. The borrower or co-signer must have a minimum credit score of 680, at least 36 months of credit history, and a minimum income of $35,000 per year.
 
ELFI does offer prequalification, meaning you can see your estimated rates and explore repayment options without affecting your credit.
 Prequalification allows you to get a more accurate idea of the rates you could be approved for without affecting your credit score. So always take advantage of it when it's available. 
There are no application, prepayment, or origination fees. There is a late fee of 5% of the past due amount or $50, whichever is less, and a $30 fee for a returned check or insufficient funds.
 
Because borrowers are required to make payments with an electronic or digital transfer, an auto pay discount is automatically reflected in your approved interest rate.
 
ELFI offers immediate, fixed, interest-only, and deferred repayment options with a six-month grace period on all loans.
 
ELFI has a referral program for its student loan refinancing program. When you refinance using your personalized referral link, you’ll get a $400 referral bonus, and the person you referred will receive a $100 credit applied to the principal balance of their ELFI loan.
 
If you meet financial eligibility requirements, you don’t need a co-signer for an ELFI student loan.
 
ELFI offers forbearance for up to 12 months due to financial hardship or medical difficulty. American Education Services, the third-party company that services ELFI student loans, states that it does offer forbearance and deferment, as well as the option to change your payment date or change payment plans to reduce your monthly payment.﻿﻿ It will also discharge loans of borrowers who die or become totally and permanently disabled.﻿﻿
 
Graduates with at least a bachelor’s degree from an approved institution can refinance their student loans with ELFI. Parents can also refinance through ELFI, with no maximum loan amount for well-qualified borrowers.
 
You can contact ELFI’s in-house customer service seven days a week via phone or text at 844-601-3534 or by email at answers@ELFI.com.
 
Loan servicer American Education Services is available by phone, email, mail, or fax Monday through Friday, 7:30 a.m. to 9 p.m. EST.
 
Because ELFI has only been offering student loans since August 2019, there are no complaints about ELFI student loans in the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s consumer complaint database. However, in 2019 there were 29 complaints regarding private loans serviced by American Education Services.﻿﻿
 
The application process is completed online and can be done in as little as a few minutes. To apply, you must:
 
You should apply before the start of the academic year or semester for which you need funding.
 
Before applying for private student loans, you should exhaust all your options for federal aid by filling out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA).﻿﻿ If you’ve explored all your options for scholarships, grants, and federal student loans and still need more funding, then a private student loan can help.
 ELFI makes applying for a student loan easy with its completely digital application process and dedicated personal loan advisor to help you along the way. If you’ve exhausted all your federal aid options and still need more than $10,000, then ELFI could be a great choice for you. However, if you just need a small loan to cover some extras, you’ll want to go with another lender.