
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Financial emergencies come in many shapes and sizes. Perhaps your car breaks down, and the repairs you need to get it back on the road are expensive. Other financial emergencies could stem from a job loss, an illness, a funeral, or any number of unexpected circumstances. If you’re facing one of these situations without enough savings to get through it, you may need to borrow money in a hurry. You may need an emergency loan. 
 
Finding the right loan can be stressful when you need fast access to cash, but if you have the added complication of bad credit, getting an emergency loan may seem hopeless. Thankfully, that’s not the case. You may still have emergency loan options even when you have credit problems. 
 
Rocket Loans, a sister company of Rocket Mortgage by Quicken Loans, offers fast funding options to qualified applicants. Among lenders that provide personal loans to credit-challenged borrowers, Rocket Loans has a competitive starting annual percentage rate (APR) of 7.161%. However, depending on the condition of your credit, along with other factors, you may not qualify for the lowest advertised rate.
 Same-day funding available, depending on the time of day you complete the new loan process Prequalification process — check loan options with a soft credit check Lower maximum interest rate than other bad-credit lenders Higher loan amounts available compared with some other lenders Upfront origination fee applies to every loan, ranging from 1% to 6% No joint loan applications Limited repayment terms available 
Other important information:
 
Avant offers the best overall online emergency loan to bad-credit borrowers. Not only may you be able to borrow up to $35,000 with a credit score as low as 600, but your loan proceeds may also show up in your bank account within one business day of approval. The APR on personal loans starts at 9.95%, which isn’t the best personal loan offer you’ll find online, but it’s not bad compared with other lenders that cater to consumers with credit challenges.
 Prequalification option available Lender reports accounts to the credit bureaus, so responsible repayment builds your credit No prepayment penalties for paying off your loan early Higher interest rates than other lenders Upfront administrative fee of up to 4.75% may apply Lower maximum loan amount than other lenders 
Other important information:
 
PenFed Credit Union offers affordable personal loan options when you need to borrow money for an emergency expense. Loan APRs start at just 6.49% and max out at 17.99%. On top of this competitive APR range, the credit union charges no origination fees on personal loans.
 Low loan amounts available, as little as $500 Co-borrowers allowed, but exercise caution Limited fees — no origination fees, application fees, or prepayment penalties Only PenFed members allowed to borrow $20,000 maximum loan amount low compared with other lenders No prequalification option available, meaning a mandatory hard credit inquiry 
Other important information:
 
LendingClub is a peer-to-peer lending marketplace that was established in 2007. Through LendingClub you may be able to find personal loans for up to $40,000 that you can use in a financial emergency. If you don’t want to borrow money from a traditional bank or an online lender, this alternative may be worth considering.
 Co-borrower allowed, but consider the risks first Prequalification option available Low minimum loan amount of $1,000 available Origination fee of 2% to 6% taken off the top of your loan Untimely funds acquisition of four days Limited repayment options available 
Other Important Information:
 
You may be tempted to turn to a payday lender in a financial emergency, especially if you have bad credit. Still, even with major credit problems, predatory payday loans aren’t the only option. Many local credit unions offer a product known as a payday alternative loan (PAL). These small loans, which come in a PAL I or PAL II version, are regulated by the National Credit Union Administration and may be available for amounts of up to $2,000. 
 Maximum interest rate of 28% versus payday loan’s typical 400% Affordable application fee at $20 No extra fees or additional funds for loan rollovers Low maximum loan amount ($1,000 for PAL I and $2,000 for PAL II) may not be enough May need to become a credit union member to qualify 
Other important information:
 
An emergency loan is a term that describes several different ways you may be able to access cash for sudden, unexpected expenses. A common type of emergency loan (and often one of the most affordable options) is a personal loan, but an emergency loan may come in the form of a credit card cash advance, payday loan, payday alternative loan, or even a loan from a friend or family member. 
 
Borrowing options do tend to be more limited when you have bad credit. Still, that doesn’t mean you’re automatically out of luck. You may be able to qualify for an emergency loan even if you have bad credit. 
 
It is important to have realistic expectations when trying to borrow money with credit challenges, especially where cost and borrowing limitations are concerned. Due to the fact that there’s more risk involved for the lender, emergency loans for bad credit can be expensive. 
 
Higher APRs and fees are common with bad-credit emergency loans. And as a bad-credit borrower, you may not be able to borrow as much money as someone with a good credit history. On the bright side, there are smart strategies you can use to improve your credit rating over time. 
 
There are multiple types of lenders that offer emergency loans for bad credit. Some of the most common options include: 
 
Remember, just because a borrowing option is available doesn’t mean that it’s a good choice. Credit card cash advances, for example, are notoriously expensive and might damage your credit score by driving up your credit utilization rate. 
 
You should also avoid payday loans and title loans whenever possible. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) warns that the average two-week payday loan features a steep APR that’s equivalent to nearly 400%.﻿﻿ 
 
Some types of emergency loans can affect your credit score, while others will not. Whether one does depends primarily on if it shows up on your credit reports with Equifax, TransUnion, or Experian.
 
If a lender doesn’t report your account to the credit bureaus, the loan won’t influence your credit score (unless you default and a collection agency adds the bad debt to your credit reports at a later date). However, if a lender does share your account details with the credit bureaus, that’s a different story.
 
Banks, credit unions, and online lenders commonly report account details to the credit bureaus. Payday lenders and title lenders generally do not.
 
When a lender reports an emergency loan to the credit bureaus, the way you manage the account dictates whether it will help or hurt your credit score. If you make all of your payments on time, the account may benefit your credit score in the long run. However, should you make late payments or become past due on your debt, that same emergency loan could hurt your credit score instead. 
 
When a lender receives a loan application, it generally starts the consideration process with some research. By checking your credit report and score, the lender can weigh the risk of taking you on as a customer. 
 
Likewise, you should do your own homework anytime you’re thinking about taking on a new debt. You should always review the pros and cons of any financing option before you borrow money—even in an emergency. 
 
Before you choose a bad-credit emergency loan, here are some important questions to ask:  
 
Repeat the questions above as you research multiple emergency loan options. Even when you’re in a rush, it’s best to compare several lenders to make sure you’re getting the best deal for your situation. 
 
When you need an emergency loan, you usually must access cash in a hurry. Thankfully, there are numerous lenders that offer fast funding to qualified borrowers. Some personal loan lenders may even deposit the funds into your bank account the same day you’re approved for financing. 
 
On the other hand, loan funding can sometimes take several days or even up to a few weeks. Certain lenders may take longer to process your loan application or release your funds than others. There’s also a chance that your personal bank or credit union may hold the funds a lender deposits into your account for a few days before you can access the money. 
 
A Federal Reserve study revealed that 40% of adults didn’t have the cash to cover a $400 emergency expense, so if you currently don’t have money set aside to handle unexpected expenses, you’re far from alone.﻿﻿ Creating an emergency fund now is the best way to prepare for surprise expenses in the future. The following five tips can help you get started. 
 
Emergency loans can offer you much-needed relief in certain situations, yet taking on more debt might not be the best solution if you’re already struggling financially. Before you fill out a new loan application, examine your budget and make sure you can afford the monthly payments. If you think an additional debt is going to overextend you financially, an alternative approach might be a better choice. 
