
An Employer Identification Number (EIN) is a unique identification number that is assigned to a business entity so that it can easily be identified by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).﻿﻿ It is commonly used by employers for the purpose of reporting taxes.
 
The EIN is also known as a Federal Tax Identification Number. When it is used to identify a corporation for tax purposes, it is commonly referred to as a Tax Identification Number (TIN).﻿﻿
 
Just as the Social Security Number (SSN) is used to identify the individual residents of the United States, the EIN is issued to identify the business entities in the country. The EIN is a unique nine-digit number issued by the IRS and includes information about which state in which the corporation is registered.﻿﻿
 Unlike the SSN, the EIN is not considered sensitive information and is freely distributed by many businesses through publications and the internet. 
The digits of an EIN are formatted as follows: XX-XXXXXXX. The IRS uses the EIN to identify taxpayers that are required to file various business tax returns.﻿﻿
 
Business entities looking to operate in the U.S. must apply for an EIN by phone, online, fax, or by mail. All forms of businesses can apply for and be issued EINs, entities such as limited liability companies (LLCs), sole proprietorships, non-profit organizations, government agencies, S corporations, partnerships, estates, and trusts, etc. Furthermore, the IRS is not biased towards the size of the company as a company with only one employee is as eligible for an EIN as a multinational corporation.﻿﻿
 
Applying for an EIN costs nothing and an application form available on the IRS website can easily be filled and submitted electronically. Once the online information has been validated, an EIN is assigned immediately. A business must be located in the U.S. or U.S. Territories to apply for an EIN online.﻿﻿
 
A business needs an EIN in order to pay employees and to file business tax returns. Furthermore, financial institutions such as banks, credit unions, and brokerage houses will not open an account for a corporation without an EIN. Self-employed individuals such as subcontractors are typically required to have an EIN, which will be used by the primary contractor to report to the IRS all business income paid to the subcontractor.
 
Employer Identification Numbers are unique to the businesses to which they are assigned. The numbers never expire, and the same number set is never reissued to another business, even if the original employer goes out of business.
 
Businesses that have changed their ownership structure usually must apply for a new EIN.﻿﻿ For example, sole proprietors who plan to incorporate their business must apply for a new EIN.﻿﻿ Depending on the nature of the particular taxpayer, the EIN may or may not be the TIN used by the IRS. For sole proprietors, the TIN is their Social Security number or an employer identification number. For corporations, partnerships, trusts, and estates, this number is an EIN.﻿﻿
 Internal Revenue Service. "Employer ID Numbers." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Taxpayer Identification Numbers (TIN)." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 1635, Employer Identification Number: Understanding your EIN," Page 2. Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 1635, Employer Identification Number: Understanding Your EIN," Pages 2, 16. Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Apply for an Employer Identification Number (EIN) Online." Accessed March 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Do You Need a New EIN?" Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 1635, Employer Identification Number: Understanding Your EIN," Page 3. Accessed Jan. 31, 2020.