
Senator Elizabeth Warren popularized the so-called "50/20/30 budget rule" (sometimes labeled "50-30-20") in her book, All Your Worth: The Ultimate Lifetime Money Plan. The basic rule is to divide up after-tax income and allocate it to spend: 50% on needs, 30% on wants, and socking away 20% to savings.﻿﻿ Here, we briefly profile this easy-to-follow budgeting plan.
 
Needs are those bills that you absolutely must pay and are the things necessary for survival. These include rent or mortgage payments, car payments, groceries, insurance, health care, minimum debt payment, and utilities. These are your "must-haves." The "needs" category does not include items that are extras, such as HBO, Netflix, Starbucks, and dining out.
 
Half of your after-tax income should be all that you need to cover your needs and obligations. If you are spending more than that on your needs, you will have to either cut down on wants or try to downsize your lifestyle, perhaps to a smaller home or more modest car. Maybe carpooling or taking public transportation to work is a solution, or cooking at home more often.
 
Wants are all the things you spend money on that are not absolutely essential. This includes dinner and movies out, that new handbag, tickets to sporting events, vacations, the latest electronic gadget, and ultra-high-speed Internet. Anything in the "wants" bucket is optional if you boil it down. You can work out at home instead of going to the gym, cook instead of eating out, or watch sports on TV instead of getting tickets to the game.
 
This category also includes those upgrade decisions you make, such as choosing a costlier steak instead of a less expensive hamburger, buying a Mercedes instead of a more economical Honda, or choosing between watching television using an antenna for free or spending money to watch cable TV. Basically, wants are all those little extras you spend money on that make life more enjoyable and entertaining.
 
Finally, try to allocate 20% of your net income to savings and investments. This includes adding money to an emergency fund in a bank savings account, making IRA contributions to a mutual fund account, and investing in the stock market. You should have at least three months of emergency savings on hand in case you lose your job or an unforeseen event occurs. After that, focus on retirement and meeting other financial goals down the road.
 If emergency funds are ever used, the first allocation of additional income should be to replenish the emergency fund account. 
Savings can also include debt repayment. While minimum payments are part of the "needs" category, any extra payments reduce the principal and future interest owed, so they are savings.
 
Americans are notoriously bad at saving, and the nation has extremely high levels of debt. As of March 2020, Americans have $14.3 trillion in total debt, which includes $438 billion in credit card debt. The personal savings rate in 2019 was 7.6%, down from 11% in 1960.
 
The 50-20-30 rule is intended to help individuals manage their after-tax income, primarily to have funds on hand for emergencies and savings for retirement. Every household should prioritize creating an emergency fund in case of job losses, unexpected medical expenses, or any other unforeseen monetary cost. If an emergency fund is used, then a household should focus on replenishing it.
 
Saving for retirement is also a critical step as individuals are living longer. Calculating how much you will need for retirement and working towards that goal, beginning at a young age will ensure a comfortable retirement.
 
Saving is difficult, and life often throws unexpected expenses at us. By following the 50-20-30 rule, individuals have a plan with how they should manage their after-tax income. If they find that their expenditures on wants are more than 20%, they can find ways to reduce those expenses that will help direct funds to more important areas such as emergency money and retirement.
 
Life should be enjoyed, and it is not recommended to live like a Spartan, but having a plan and sticking to it will allow you to cover your expenses, save for retirement, all at the same time doing the activities that make you happy.
 FiftyThirtyTwenty.com. "Financial Stability in America." Accessed Oct. 1, 2019.
A 5/6 hybrid adjustable-rate mortgage (5/6 hybrid ARM) is an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) with an initial five-year fixed interest rate, after which the interest rate begins to adjust every six months according to an index plus a margin, known as the fully indexed interest rate. The index is variable, while the margin is fixed for the life of the loan.
 
It's important to note that 5/6 hybrid ARMs have multiple features to consider. When shopping for an ARM, the index, the arm margin, and the interest rate cap structure should not be overlooked. The margin is a fixed percentage rate that is added to an indexed rate to determine the fully indexed interest rate of an adjustable-rate mortgage. The margin is fixed for the life of the loan, but it can frequently be negotiated with the lender before signing mortgage documents.
 
The cap structure refers to the provisions governing interest rate increases and limits on a variable rate credit product. The interest rate cap structure determines how quickly and to what extent the interest rate can adjust over the life of the mortgage.
 Mortgage lending discrimination is illegal. If you think you've been discriminated against based on race, religion, sex, marital status, use of public assistance, national origin, disability, or age, there are steps you can take. One such step is to file a report to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Notably, 5/6 hybrid ARMs are usually tied to the six-month London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) index, the world’s most widely-used benchmark for short-term interest rates. Other popular indexes for indexed rates include the prime rate and Constant Maturity Treasury indexes.
 
Most indexes behave differently depending upon the interest rate environment. Those with a built-in lag effect, such as the Monthly Treasury Average Index (MTA Index), are more beneficial in a rising interest rate environment than short-term interest rate indexes, such as the one-month LIBOR.
 
In a rising interest rate environment, the longer the time period between interest rate reset dates, the more beneficial it will be for the borrower. For example, a 5/1 hybrid ARM, which has a fixed five-year period and then adjusts on an annual basis, would be better than a 5/6 ARM in a rising rate environment. The opposite would be true in a falling interest rate environment.
 
Many adjustable-rate mortgages start with lower interest rates than fixed-rate mortgages. This could provide the borrower with a significant savings advantage, depending on the direction of interest rates after the initial fixed period of an ARM. 
 
It might also make more sense from a cost perspective to take an ARM, especially if a borrower intends to sell the home before the fixed-rate period of the ARM ends. Historically, people spend seven to 10 years in a home, so a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage may not be the best choice for many home buyers.
 
Consider a newly married couple purchasing their first home. They know from the outset that the house will be too small once they have children, and so they take out a 5/6 hybrid ARM, knowing they’ll get all the advantages of the lower interest rate because they intend to buy a larger home before or near the time the initial rate is subject to adjustment.
 
The biggest risk associated with a 5/6 hybrid ARM is interest rate risk. It could increase every six months after the first five years of the loan, which would significantly raise the cost of monthly mortgage payments.
 
A borrower should estimate the maximum potential monthly payment they could afford beyond the initial five-year period. Or, the borrower should be willing to sell or refinance the home once the fixed period of the mortgage has ended.
 
The interest rate risk is mitigated to a degree by lifetime and period caps on 5/6 ARMs. Lifetime caps limit the maximum amount an interest rate can increase beyond the initial rate, while periodic caps restrict how much the interest rate can increase during each adjustment period of a loan.

A 5/1 hybrid adjustable-rate mortgage (5/1 ARM) begins with an initial five-year fixed-interest rate period, followed by a rate that adjusts on an annual basis. The "5" in the term refers to the number of years with a fixed rate, and the "1" refers to how often the rate adjusts after that (once per year). As such, monthly payments can go up—sometimes dramatically—after five years.
 
The 5/1 hybrid ARM may be the most popular type of adjustable-rate mortgage, but it's not the only option. There are 3/1, 7/1, and 10/1 ARMs, as well. These loans offer an introductory fixed rate for three, seven, or 10 years respectively, after which they adjust annually.
 
Also known as a five-year fixed-period ARM or 5-year ARM, this mortgage features an interest rate that adjusts according to an index plus a margin. Hybrid ARMs are very popular with consumers, as they may feature an initial interest rate that is significantly lower than a traditional fixed-rate mortgage. Most lenders offer at least one version of such hybrid ARMs, of these loans, the 5/1 Hybrid ARM is especially popular.
 
Other ARM structures exist, such as the 5/5 and 5/6 ARMs, which also feature a five-year introductory period followed by a rate adjustment every five years or every six months, respectively. Notably, 15/15 ARMs adjust once after 15 years and then remain fixed for the remainder of the loan. Less common are 2/28 and 3/27 ARMs. With the former, the fixed interest rate applies for only the first two years, followed by 28 years of adjustable rates; with the latter, the fixed rate is for three years, with adjustments in each of the following 27 years. Some of these loans adjust every six months rather than annually.
 Hybrid ARMs have a fixed interest rate for a set period of years, followed by an extended period during which rates are adjustable. 
Interest rates change based on their marginal rates when ARMs adjust along with the indexes to which they're tied. If a 5/1 hybrid ARM has a 3% margin and the index is 3%, it adjusts to 6%.
 
But the extent to which the fully indexed interest rate on a 5/1 hybrid ARM can adjust is often limited by an interest rate cap structure. The fully indexed interest rate can be tied to several different indexes, and while this number varies, the margin is fixed for the life of the loan.
 
A borrower can save a significant sum on their monthly payments with a 5/1 hybrid ARM. Assuming a home purchase price of $300,000 with a 20% down payment ($60,000), a borrower with very good/excellent credit can save between 50 and 150 basis points on a loan and more than $100 per month in payments on their $240,000 loan. Of course, that rate could rise, so borrowers should anticipate a rise in their monthly payment, be prepared to sell their home when their rate goes up, or be ready to refinance.
 
In most cases, ARMs offer lower introductory rates than traditional mortgages with fixed interest rates. These loans can be ideal for buyers who plan to live in their homes for only a short period of time and sell before the end of the introductory period. The 5/1 Hybrid ARM also works well for buyers who plan to refinance before the introductory rate expires. That said, hybrid ARMs like the 5/1 tend to have a higher interest rate than standard ARMs.
 Lower introductory rates than traditional fixed-interest mortgages Interest rates possible to drop before the mortgage adjusts, resulting in lower payments Good for buyers who will live in their homes for short periods of time Higher interest rates than standard adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) When mortgage adjusts, interest rates probable to rise Could be trapped into unaffordable rate hikes due to personal issues or market forces 
There's also a chance that the interest rate might decrease, lowering the borrower's monthly payments when it adjusts. But in many cases the rate will rise, increasing the borrower's monthly payments.
 
If a borrower takes out an ARM with the intention of getting out of the mortgage by selling or refinancing before the rate resets, personal finances or market forces might trap them in the loan, potentially subjecting them to a rate hike they can't afford. Consumers considering an adjustable-rate mortgage should educate themselves on how they work.

The term 28/36 rule refers to a common-sense rule used to calculate the amount of debt an individual or household should assume. According to this rule, a household should spend a maximum of 28% of its gross monthly income on total housing expenses and no more than 36% on total debt service, including housing and other debt such as car loans and credit cards. Lenders often use this rule to assess whether to extend credit to borrowers.
 
Lenders use different criteria to determine whether to approve credit applications. One of the main considerations is an individual's credit score. They usually require that a credit score falls within a certain range before considering credit approval. However, a credit score is not the only consideration. Lenders also consider a borrower’s income and debt-to-income (DTI) ratio.
 
Another factor is the 28/36, which is an important calculation that determines a consumer's financial health. It helps determine how much debt a consumer can safely assume based on their income, other debts, and financial needs—the premise being that debt loads in excess of the 28/36 parameters are likely difficult for an individual or household to sustain and may eventually lead to default. This rule is a guide lenders use to structure underwriting requirements. Some lenders may vary these parameters based on a borrower’s credit score, potentially allowing high credit score borrowers to have slightly higher DTI ratios.
 Most traditional lenders require a maximum household expense-to-income ratio of 28% and a maximum total debt to income ratio of 36% for loan approval. 
Lenders that use the 28/36 rule in their credit assessment may include questions about housing expenses and comprehensive debt accounts in their credit application. Each lender establishes his or her own parameters for housing debt and total debt as a part of their underwriting program. This means that household expense payments, primarily rent or mortgage payments, can be no more than 28% of the monthly or annual income. Similarly, total debt payments cannot exceed 36% of income.
 
Since the 28/36 rule is a standard that most lenders use before advancing any credit, consumers should be aware of the rule before they apply for any type of credit. That's because lenders pull credit checks for every application they receive. These hard inquiries show up on a consumer's credit report. Having multiple inquiries over a short period of time can affect a consumer's credit score and may hinder their chance of getting credit in the future.
 
Here's a hypothetical example to show how the 28/36 rule actually works. Let's say an individual or family brings home a monthly income of $5,000. If they want to adhere to the 28/36 rule, they could budget $1,000 for a monthly mortgage payment and housing expenses. This would leave an additional $800 for making other types of loan repayments.

Traditional 401(k) contributions effectively reduce both adjusted gross income (AGI) and modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).﻿﻿ Participants are able to defer a portion of their salaries and claim tax deductions for that year. A Roth 401(k), similarly to a Roth IRA, is funded through after-tax dollars and offers no immediate tax deduction.
 
Traditional 401(k) plan contributions are not considered to be deductions on a 1040 tax return, like a contribution to a traditional IRA.﻿﻿ To contribute to a 401(k), an employee must be eligible and the employer must offer such a plan. Then, an employee may begin deferring a percentage of his salary toward that plan throughout the year. Any amount contributed to the plan up to the IRS limit is considered a reduction of that employee's taxable wage.
 
In 2019, the maximum contribution limit was $19,000, and those age 50 or older were able to contribute a "catch-up" amount of an additional $6,000. (For 2020, the maximum contribution limit is $19,500 and the catch-up amount is $6,500.)﻿﻿ For example, if a 40-year-old employee who makes a $100,000 a year salary contributes the full amount of $19,500, the reported income from the employer shows $80,500. The original contribution of $19,500 is deposited into the employee's own personal 401(k) plan to be invested within the plan's options. The employee is taxed only when the funds are distributed from the 401(k) plan or from a future rollover IRA.
 
Traditional 401(k) plans are very attractive for individuals looking to reduce their AGI/MAGI. The potential of tax deferral and reduction of current taxable income offer ways to reduce tax liabilities. Many have also found this a better option than a traditional IRA due to the maximum annual contribution being limited to only $6,000, with a $1,000 catch-up. (This amount is the maximum for both 2019 and 2020.)﻿﻿ If you are interested in contributing to your employer's 401(k) plan, contact your plan sponsor or human resources department. For more tax strategies, consult a tax or financial advisor.
 
A Roth 401(k) is an employer-sponsored retirement savings plan, just like a 401(k). However, unlike a 401(k), a Roth 401(k) is funded by after-tax dollars up to the same contribution rate of $19,000 per year (total, including both employer and employee contribution), plus an additional $6,000 catch-up contribution for employees age 50 or older (with 2020 maximums of $19,500 and $6,500, respectively). Roth IRAs have a max contribution of $6,000, plus an additional $1,000 for employees age 50 or older, in 2019. (IRA contributions are unchanged for 2020).﻿﻿
 
Because a Roth 401(k) and Roth IRA are taxed upfront, they do not lower your AGI/MAGI. The initial contributions are not tax-deductible, but money can be withdrawn without taxation, provided it is a qualified distribution, meaning the account has been held for at least five years and distributions are made after age 59½ or due to other certain specific qualifications.﻿﻿ For Roth 401(k)s, distributions are required after you hit 72 years of age. The RMD age was increased to 72 from 70½ in 2019 under the Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement Act of 2019 (SECURE Act).﻿﻿
 
Roth 401(k)s and Roth IRAs can be good options for people who believe they will be paying a much higher tax rate at retirement than when making contributions. They can also be a good investment and savings options once 401(k) contributions have been maxed out.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Lowering AGI This Year Can Help Taxpayers When They File Next Year." Accessed May 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "401(k) Plan Overview." Accessed May 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "401(k) Contribution Limit Increases to $19,500 for 2020; Catch-Up Limit Rises to $6,500." Accessed May 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - Catch-Up Contributions." Accessed May 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Roth Comparison Chart." Accessed May 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "401(k) Resource Guide - Plan Participants - General Distribution Rules." Accessed May 3, 2020. 116th Congress, 2nd Session. "H.R.1994 - Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement Act of 2019." Accessed May 3, 2020.
Your child (or grandchild) might be just a two-year-old, but it's not too early to start figuring out how you'll pay for college. Here's why: It's estimated that it will cost $244,667 in 2020 to send your toddler to an in-state, public college for four years. Are you thinking about a private college? That’s going to run $553,064 by the time your toddler is ready for higher education.
 
College costs tend to increase at about two times the rate of inflation each year—a trend that is expected to continue indefinitely. Here’s what you can expect to pay for each year of tuition, fees, and room and board by the time your kids (or grandkids) are ready to head off to college (assuming a steady 6% college cost inflation rate):
 
Note: Want to see an estimate of how much it will cost to send your child or grandchild to college? Use the College Cost Calculator at the College Savings Plans Network.
 
Keep in mind, these numbers represent a single year of costs; the number of years your child attends college will depend on the degree(s) they are seeking. While many students will qualify for financial aid, scholarships, and grants to help cover college costs, there are still a number of ways to further reduce college costs.
 
One of the easiest ways is to invest the money you’ve set aside for your child or grandchild’s college years in tax-smart investment vehicles. These plans and accounts allow you to efficiently save for your child or grandchild’s education while shielding the savings from the IRS as much as possible.
 
“One of the best ways to help a child financially while limiting your own tax liability is to use a 529 college plan,” says Sam Davis, partner/financial advisor with TBH Global Asset Management. A 529 plan is a tax-advantaged investment plan that lets families save for the future college costs of a beneficiary.
 
Plans have high limits on contributions, which are made with after-tax dollars. You can contribute up to the annual exclusion amount each year, which is $15,000 in 2020 (the "annual exclusion" is the maximum amount you can transfer by gift, in the form of cash or other assets, to as many people as you wish, without incurring a gift tax). All withdrawals from the 529 are free from federal income tax as long as they are used for qualified education expenses (most states offer tax-free withdrawals, as well).﻿﻿
 
Those who have the funds can "superfund" a 529 plan by contributing five years of gifts at once, per child, per person without being subject to the gift tax. This means, for example, that a pair of super-wealthy grandparents could contribute $75,000 each ($150,000 per couple) when a child is young and let that money grow to cover their entire costs.﻿﻿ There are complicated rules about how to do this, so don't try it without detailed tax advice.
 
The Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act, signed into law by President Donald Trump in December 2019, created multiple provisions intended to improve retirement and savings plans. Under the new law, 529 plan funds can now be used to pay off up to $10,000 in student loans, and the funds can also be used to pay for expenses related to registered apprenticeship programs.﻿﻿
 
There are two types of 529 plans:
 
These savings plans work like other investment plans, such as 401(k)s and individual retirement accounts (IRAs), in that your contributions are invested in mutual funds or other investment products. Account earnings are based on the market performance of the underlying investments, and most plans offer age-based investment options that become more conservative as the beneficiary nears college age. The 529 savings plans can only be administered at the state level.
 
Prepaid tuition plans (also called guaranteed savings plans) allow families to lock in today’s tuition rate by pre-purchasing tuition. The program pays out at the future cost to any of the state's eligible institutions when the beneficiary is in college. If the beneficiary ends up going to an out-of-state or private school, you can transfer the value of the account or get a refund. Prepaid tuition plans can be administered by states and higher education institutions, though a limited number of states have them.
 
“I strongly advise my clients to fund 529 plans for the unsurpassed income tax breaks,” Davis says. “Although the contributions are not deductible on your federal tax return, your investment grows tax-deferred, and distributions to pay for the beneficiary's college costs come out federally tax-free.”
 
An IRA is a tax-advantaged savings account where you keep investments such as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. You get to choose the investments in the account and can adjust the investments as your needs and goals change.
 
Under the SECURE Act, you can now wait until age 72 to begin taking required minimum distributions (RMDs), and the law removed the age requirement for depositing money into a traditional IRA, so you can continue making contributions at any age, if you are still working.﻿﻿ In general, if you withdraw from your IRA before you are 59½ years old, you will owe a 10% additional tax on the early distribution.
 
However, you can withdraw money from your traditional or Roth IRA before reaching age 59½ without paying the 10% additional tax to pay for qualified higher education expenses for yourself, your spouse, or your children or grandchildren in the year the withdrawal is made. The waiver applies to the 10% penalty only; you will still owe income tax on the distribution unless it's a Roth IRA.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Using your retirement funds to pay for your child or grandchild’s college tuition does come with a couple of drawbacks:
 
To avoid dipping into your own retirement, you may be able to set up a Roth IRA in your child's or grandchild’s name. The catch: Your child (not you) must have earned income from a job during the year for which a contribution is made. You can actually fund their annual contribution, up to the maximum amount, but only if they have earnings.
 
The IRS doesn’t care where the money comes from as long as it does not exceed the amount your child earned. If your child earns $500 from a summer job, for example, you can make the $500 contribution to the Roth IRA with your own money, and your child can do something else with their earnings. 
 
Here's how to do it: If your child is a minor (younger than 18 or 21 years old, depending on the state in which you live), many banks, brokers, and mutual funds will let you set up a custodial or guardian IRA. As the custodian, you (the adult) control the assets in the custodial IRA until your child reaches the age of majority, at which point the assets are turned over to them.
 
A Coverdell Education Savings Account (ESA) can be set up at a bank or brokerage firm to help pay the qualified education expenses of your child or grandchild. Like 529 plans, Coverdell ESAs allow money to grow tax-deferred and withdrawals are tax-free at the federal level (and in most cases, the state level) when used for qualifying education expenses.
 
Coverdell ESA benefits apply to higher education expenses, as well as elementary and secondary education expenses. If the money is used for nonqualified expenses, you will owe tax and a 10% penalty on earnings.
 
Coverdell ESA contributions are not deductible, and contributions must be made before the beneficiary reaches age 18 (unless he or she is a special needs beneficiary, as defined by the IRS). While more than one Coverdell ESA can be set up for a single beneficiary, the maximum contribution per beneficiary—not per account—per year is limited to $2,000.
 To contribute to a Coverdell ESA, your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) must be less than $110,000 as a single filer or $220,000 as a married couple filing jointly. 
Uniform Gifts to Minors Act (UGMA) accounts and Uniform Transfers to Minors Act (UTMA) accounts are custodial accounts that allow you to put money and/or assets in trust for a minor child or grandchild. As the trustee, you manage the account until the child reaches the age of majority (18 to 21 years of age, depending on your state). Once the child reaches that age, they own the account and can use the money in any manner they wish. That means they don't have to use the money for educational expenses.
 
Although there are no limits on contributions, parents and grandparents can cap individual annual contributions at $15,000 per individual ($30,000 per married couple) to avoid triggering the gift tax. One thing to be aware of is that custodial accounts count as students' assets (rather than parents'), so large balances can limit eligibility for financial aid. The federal financial-aid formula expects students to contribute 20% of savings, versus only 5.6% of savings for the parents.
 
The annual exclusion allows you to give $15,000 in 2020 in cash or other assets each year to as many people as you want. Spouses can combine annual exclusions to give $30,000 to as many individuals as they like—tax-free. As a parent or grandparent, you can gift a child up to the annual exclusion each year to help him, or her pay for college costs. Gifts that exceed the annual exclusion count against the lifetime exemption, which is $11.58 million per individual in 2020.﻿﻿
 
Concerned about the lifetime exemption? As a grandparent, you can help your grandchild pay for college while limiting your own tax liability by making a payment directly to their higher-education institution. As Joanna Foster, MBA, CPA explains, “Grandparents can pay the educational expense directly to the provider, and that does not count against the annual exclusion of $15,000.” So, even if you send $20,000 a year to your grandchild’s college, the amount over $15,000 ($5,000 in this case) would not count against the lifetime exemption.
 
Many people approach saving for college the same way they approach retirement: They do nothing because the financial obligations seem insurmountable. Many people say their retirement plan is never to retire (not a real plan, needless to say, unless you die young). Similarly, parents might joke (or assume) that the only way their kids are going to college is if they get a full scholarship.
 
Aside from the obvious flaw with this plan, it’s a back-seat approach to a situation that really needs a front-seat driver. Even if you can save only a small amount of money in a 529 or Coverdell plan, it’s going to help.
 
For most families, paying for college is not as simple as writing a check each quarter. Instead, it’s an amalgamation of financial aid, scholarships, grants, and money that the child has earned as well as money that parents and grandparents have contributed to tax-smart college savings vehicles.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 313 Qualified Tuition Programs (QTPs).' Accessed June 25, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Form 709 (2019).' Accessed June 25, 2020. U.S. Congress. "H.R.1994 - Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement Act of 2019." Accessed June 25, 2020. IRS.gov. "Qualified Education Expenses." Accessed Sept. 04, 2020. IRS.gov. "Retirement Topics - Exceptions to Tax on Early Distributions." Accessed Sept. 04, 2020. IRS.gov. "Frequently Asked Questions on Gift Taxes." Accessed Sept. 04, 2020.
Americans carry an estimated $1.5 trillion in student loan debt, and nearly two-thirds of that amount, or $929 billion, is held by women.﻿﻿
 
The figures come from the American Association of University Women. The association also found that Black women finish their undergraduate education with more debt than all other graduates. Meanwhile, women who attend for-profit colleges wind up owing far more than those who attend public or private four-year schools.﻿﻿
 
There could be several explanations as to why women leave school with more debt. Chief among them is a persistent gender wage gap, the number of women seeking four-year degrees compared to men, and the comparative levels of financial literacy.
 
Women make up 57% of undergraduate students in the United States. An estimated 60% of all students seeking a Master's degree are women.﻿﻿ This is largely because women may need one more degree to close the earnings gap with men, according to a report from the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce.﻿﻿ These demographics in part clarify the unbalanced numbers regarding student loan debt.  
 
"Women are [statistically] more educated than men and seek out more graduate school degrees," said Alyssa Schaefer, Chief Marketing Officer of online lending platform Laurel Road. "You'd think that wages follow that, but they don't."
 
Georgetown estimated that the gender wage gap was the widest in the highest paying fields, with men earning 17% to 43% more than women, depending on the occupation.﻿﻿ This inequality results in women having less disposable income to pay back loans, and taking longer to do so. 
 
Black women have an even more difficult time repaying loans due to both gender and racial discrimination. The American Association of University Women estimated Black women leave school with $37,588 in average debt, the highest of any group. This compared to $31,346 for white women and $29,862 for white men. And note: the average student loan figures don't include students who manage to graduate with no debt at all.﻿﻿ 
 
Black women may graduate with higher debt because they prioritize educational attainment and job passions over high salaries.
 
"Women of color typically tend to pursue careers in education, social work, and psychology, which pay less and require master's or doctoral degrees," said Mary Eschelbach Hansen, professor of economics at American University. "They do this because they believe these fields are important and meaningful, despite the cost of succeeding in them."
 
Annamaria Lusardi, the academic director of the Global Financial Literacy Excellence Center at The George Washington University School of Business, believed women might leave school with more debt because they were less informed about student loans and wind up borrowing more money than necessary, often at higher interest rates.
 
A 2017 study co-authored by Lusardi found that just 30% of women globally could answer questions about finances and were considered to be financially literate. This compared to 35% for men. In advanced economies, financial literacy improves, though a gender gap remains: 59% of men could adequately answer questions on financial topics, compared to 51% of women.﻿﻿
 
"We ask young people to make important and consequential decisions about their education and how to finance it without giving them the proper knowledge that is required to make those decisions," Lusardi said. "It is imperative that we equip the young with the basic skills that are needed to thrive in today's society."
 American Association of University Women. "Deeper in Debt," Page 1. Accessed July 10, 2020. Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce. "Women Can't Win," Page 9. Accessed July 10, 2020. Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce. "Women Can't Win," Page 6. Accessed July 10, 2020. Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce. "Women Can't Win," Page 21. Accessed July 10, 2020. Global Financial Literacy Excellence Center. "The Gender Gap in Financial Literacy: A Global Perspective," Page 5. Accessed July 10, 2020.