
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Farmers is an insurance company that offers auto, homeowners, life, business, and even pet insurance policies. The company has been providing insurance coverage since 1928, and you can insure everything from your daily driver to your prized antique vehicle with Farmers.
 
However, it only has average rankings for customer service and pricing, so you may find that its auto insurance policies are more expensive than you can find elsewhere.
 Special coverage options for new cars Insures antique and collectible cars Rideshare insurance available Personal information required for online quotes No gap coverage Only average rankings for customer service and pricing The amount Farmers wrote in direct auto insurance premiums in 2019, making it the seventh-largest car insurance company in the country﻿﻿ 
With Farmers you can get an insurance quote online, or you can contact an agent for personalized assistance. Farmers offers the following coverage options:
 
This is an option you can add to your policy. Farmers will forgive one at-fault accident for every three years you go without one, helping to keep your premiums from going up.
 
If you’re at fault in an accident, collision coverage pays for the repairs to your vehicle. It covers repairs after accidents with other vehicles, objects, and animals.
 
Comprehensive coverage pays for repairs to your vehicle resulting from incidents other than accidents, such as storms or theft.
 
If you added after-market equipment to your vehicle, such as speakers or custom wheels, the customized equipment option will cover the cost to repair or replace those features. It’s available on any vehicle with comprehensive or collision coverage.
 
With this coverage you’ll pay nothing out of pocket to replace your windshield or glass. It offers a $0 deductible on glass repair and replacement.
 
This also covers glass repair and replacement but has a $100 deductible.
 
This option is popular for car collectors and antique vehicle owners. It pays you a defined, agreed-upon value if your car is a total loss.
 
Nearly all states require liability insurance, which covers you when you’re at fault in an accident. It pays for damage and the cost of injury to others.
 
While your car is being repaired, this pays a flat sum for transportation. You can use it to pay for public transportation, car rentals, taxis, or rideshare services.
 
No matter who is at fault in an accident, medical payments pays for medical care for you and your passengers.
 
New car replacement will pay to replace your vehicle with a new one of the same make and model if your car is totaled within the first two model years and 24,000 miles.
 
OEM coverage pays for the use of factory-original parts in repairs. It’s available on cars up to 10 years old.
 
PIP covers the cost of your rehabilitation and lost wages after an accident, regardless of who is at fault.
 
If you have personal umbrella coverage, you can have additional liability insurance above the limits of your auto policy. It helps protect your assets in case of a lawsuit.
 
A popular option for car collectors, this will pay up to $750 to replace spare parts you keep on hand.
 
If your car is disabled, this provides 24/7 aid. You can get help with towing, tire changes, or locksmith services.
 
Uninsured motorist coverage ameliorates your losses if you’re in an accident with a motorist who doesn’t have insurance. Underinsured motorist protection covers you if your accident partner has insufficient insurance. Both help pay for damages to your vehicle and any bodily injuries you or your passengers sustain.
 
Farmers has several discounts that can reduce your insurance costs.
 
Discounts can vary by state, so contact a Farmers agent to see which ones you are eligible for in your area.
 The Signal Discount, Farmers’ most significant discount program, isn’t available in California, Hawaii, New York, and South Carolina. 
Farmers offers car insurance in all 50 states, though its coverage options and discounts can vary.
 
With Farmers you can get an insurance quote online. However, to purchase coverage, you’ll have to speak with a Farmers agent. You can typically talk with an agent in person, over the phone, or through email.
 
While Farmers’ claims center is open 24/7, its general customer support is only available during certain hours. You can contact Farmers’ customer service by calling 888-327-6335 Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. CT. On Saturday and Sunday the hours are 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. CT. If you live in Kentucky, you should call 877-388-6628 instead.
 
Farmers was ranked 11th out of 23 car insurance companies in the J.D. Power 2019 Auto Claims Satisfaction Study. The study ranked companies based on their product offerings, pricing, communications, and customer interactions, and Farmers’ rating was slightly below the industry average.﻿﻿
 
In 2020 AM Best, the credit rating agency dedicated to the insurance industry, gave the Financial Strength Rating of A (Excellent) to Farmers Insurance Group. The rating recognized Farmers’ strong balance sheet, operating performance, and favorable business profile.﻿﻿
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) collects all complaints that consumers submit about insurance companies. Each year the NAIC releases company complaint ratios, meaning the number of complaints it received relative to the company’s market share.
 
The national complaint index is 1.0. A complaint ratio above 1.0 means the company received more complaints than is expected for its size, while a ratio below 1.0 means the reverse.
 
In 2019 Farmers’ private passenger segment had a complaint ratio of 0.86, which is slightly lower than the national complaint index, indicating that Farmers received fewer complaints than is typical for its market share.﻿﻿
 For the past three years Farmers’ complaint ratios have been close to the national complaint index. It has received an average amount of complaints for its market share. 
Farmers offers a wide range of insurance products, including:
 
You can file a claim online, directly with your agent, or over the phone to the Farmers claims center, which is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, at 800-435-7764.
 
When you file a claim, you’ll be assigned to a claims representative, who will contact you to get information about the incident and to schedule an in-person appointment, if needed. The representative will send you an evaluation and estimate and walk you through the next steps to get your vehicle repaired or replaced.
 
To cancel your Farmers insurance policy, contact your agent or call the Farmers general customer service line. Be prepared to provide your insurance policy number, contact information, and the date you’d like your policy to end.
 
You can get an insurance quote online. You’ll be asked for the following information about you and your car:
 
In most cases Farmers will use this information to generate an automated quote you can customize. However, there are some situations in which Farmers will be unable to provide an online quote, and you’ll have to contact an agent.
 
Farmers is a well-known insurance company with decades of experience that offers multiple insurance products. It specializes in serving customers who want to bundle policies with other insurance products or insure new or specialty vehicles. If you need multiple insurance policies for your car and home or have a difficult-to-insure antique vehicle, Farmers can be a good choice. For other drivers, though, Farmers may be more expensive and have less accessible customer service than you’ll find with other insurance companies.
 Farmers is a reputable car insurance company that offers a range of coverage options. Especially if you want new car replacement coverage or insurance for an antique or collectible vehicle, Farmers can be an excellent choice.