
FICO 10 and FICO 10T are new credit scoring models scheduled to be introduced by Fair Isaac Corporation in 2020. According to the company, FICO 10 and FICO 10T are designed to outperform all previous versions of FICO credit scores in helping lenders evaluate credit risk. A key feature of FICO 10T is the use of trended credit bureau data on individual borrowers to calculate their credit scores.﻿﻿ 
 
The FICO Score 10 Suite was announced by FICO in January 2020, with an expected rollout date of summer 2020. It is designed to be the most predictive and comprehensive credit score model developed by FICO to date, allowing lenders to better measure risk for credit decision-making. FICO Score 10T includes trended credit bureau data on individuals to provide a more complete picture of their potential credit risk.﻿﻿ 
 
According to FICO, the new credit scoring models could help lenders reduce default rates by 10% and 9% respectively for credit cards and auto loans, compared with FICO 9. For mortgage loans, FICO estimates that the FICO Score 10 Suite could reduce defaults by 17%.﻿﻿
 
FICO 10T represents a new take on credit scoring, with the use of trended data. Trended data looks at how consumers have managed their financial accounts over the previous 24+ months, including things like whether they carried a balance from month to month or consolidated their debts during that time. This is meant to give lenders more insight into how someone handles their finances. FICO 10 and 10T scores can be used by lenders to assess credit risk when a person applies for credit cards, car loans, personal loans, or mortgages. 
 
FICO 10 and FICO 10T won’t replace earlier versions of the FICO credit score, however, and lenders can continue to use those older models. For instance, many lenders still rely on the FICO 8 credit scoring model for credit approvals with products like credit cards or personal loans. For mortgage loans, lenders may use different versions, such as FICO 2, FICO 4, or FICO 5. Car loan issuers can use the same options: FICO 2, FICO 4, FICO 5, or FICO 8. ﻿﻿
 When you apply for a mortgage, lenders can pull your FICO credit scores from each of the three major credit bureaus. But typically, they only use the average or middle score of the three for making credit decisions.  
FICO credit scores are meant to help lenders, such as banks and credit card issuers, predict how much of a risk you are likely to be, based on your financial history. Specifically, FICO scores take five major factors into account:
 
Because payment history carries the most weight, paying your bills on time each month can help you establish a positive credit history and potentially improve your FICO scores. Paying late, on the other hand, can be damaging to FICO scores. The second most important factor, credit utilization, refers to how much of your available credit you are using at any given time.
 
It’s worth noting that delinquencies may hurt credit scores even more under the FICO 10 and FICO 10T models. So if you miss payments, you could be more likely to see a significant drop in your credit score than you would under previous FICO scoring models. This is a good incentive to get in the habit of paying bills on time each month.
 
Credit utilization could also carry more weight with the new scores. Like other FICO scoring models, the updated FICO 10 models should be more favorable toward consumers who maintain a lower credit utilization versus a higher one. Having personal loans may also count against you more with FICO 10 and FICO 10T than it would with older FICO models.
 
FICO 10 and FICO 10T credit scores are expected to become available to lenders in 2020. So far, FICO has made no announcement about when (or whether) individual consumers will have access to their FICO 10 and FICO 10T scores. 
 
For now, you can check your FICO 8 and FICO 9 credit scores by purchasing them through FICO. Alternatively, you may be able to access either of those scores free of charge as a benefit of your credit card. Many credit card companies and banks offer FICO credit score access to their customers. 
 If you have trouble remembering due dates, set up banking alerts or consider automating your bill payments whenever possible to avoid paying late. 
If you had a low FICO score before FICO 10 and FICO 10T were introduced, you are unlikely to see any improvement under the new models. Improving your credit scores begins with knowing what works in your favor and what may hurt your score. With all FICO credit scores, taking the following steps can help you improve your credit: 
 
Out of those five, payment history and credit utilization will have the most impact on your FICO 10 and FICO 10T credit scores. Staying on top of due dates and keeping credit card balances low could be most helpful in boosting your scores. Since FICO 10T scores take trended data into account, time may be the best tool you have for building good credit. The longer a history you have of paying bills in a timely manner and maintaining low debt balances, the better. 
 FICO. "FICO Introduces New FICO Score 10 Suite." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020. FICO. "FICO Introduces New FICO Score 10 Suite." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020. FICO. "FICO Scores Versions." Accessed Aug. 1, 2020.