
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Fidelity Home Warranty 
Fidelity National Home Warranty is a regional home warranty company founded in 1974. Home protection from Fidelity National is competitively priced, starting at $265 per year, but the company has many complaints and poor customer reviews regarding service and claims processing.
 Based on our review of over a dozen home warranty companies, Fidelity National Home Warranty was not one of the best companies we found. To see other options that may be better, visit our list of the best home warranty companies. Coverage starting at $265 per year Four plans available All service providers are insured Standard $75 service charge Only available in 17 states Many complaints of poor response times Number of service providers isn’t disclosed Warranties must be purchased at close of escrow 
Fidelity National Home Warranty was founded in 1974 and is headquartered in Concord, California. In 1996, the company was bought by Fidelity National Financial, the nation’s largest title insurance company. Since then, the company has also acquired BGP Holdings and HISCO Home Warranty. It is reportedly one of the fastest-growing home warranty companies in the United States. While the company advertises a preferred service provider network, no information is available on the size or distribution of their providers.
 Fidelity Home Warranty 
Fidelity National’s home warranty programs cover many things that aren’t typically covered by homeowners’ insurance, including appliances and household systems like air conditioners and ductwork. The company offers up to four different home warranty plans in 17 states including Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Missouri, Nevada, New Mexico, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, Utah, and Washington.
 
We reviewed Fidelity National’s plans, coverages, exclusions, prices, and availability so you can decide whether they’re right for you.
 
Homeowners who want to purchase a home warranty from Fidelity National can choose from up to four plans, though the availability of individual plans varies by state. While home warranties from Fidelity National can only be purchased when you’re buying a home, each plan lasts for one year with no waiting period. Homeowners may also have the option of renewing coverage after the first year.
 
In addition to its standard plans, Fidelity National also offers numerous optional coverages that can be purchased for an additional cost. Homeowners can customize their coverage according to home type; Fidelity National’s default pricing is for single-family houses, but coverage is also available for condos, townhouses, and mobile homes.
 
Fidelity National makes marketing materials available to real estate professionals that provide additional details about the company’s plans. However, the company does not appear to offer plans specific to real estate agents. 
 
The prices of Fidelity National’s individual plans vary by state and specific coverages. Each state offers different prices for detached single-family homes, condos, townhouses, and mobile homes. Plan pricing starts at $265 per year, while comprehensive plans for single-family homes in most states cost about $420 per year. Homeowners who request service are also responsible for a $75 service fee.
 Many customers report encountering hidden costs when they file a claim. 
Plan pricing for Fidelity National is generally fair relative to other home warranty companies we’ve reviewed. However, many customers have reported to the BBB that, when they filed claims, they were charged for repairs costs that were excluded from their plans. These hidden costs make it important for customers to carefully review their coverages and exclusions prior to purchasing a plan.
 
There are a number of items excluded from Fidelity National home warranties. First, plans only cover the appliances and systems specifically named in plan documents. Additionally, within each system may be items that aren’t covered.
 
For example, coverage for garage doors doesn’t include door springs, cables, rollers, guides, or transmitters. Items not covered by standard home plumbing system benefits include showerheads, fixtures, faucets, bathtubs, sinks, shower enclosures, septic tanks, saunas, bidets, whirlpool bath jet plumbing, and indoor or outdoor sprinkler systems.
 
Fidelity National home warranties also don’t cover mold removal or remediation.
 
Each plan that Fidelity National offers includes individual caps and limits that vary by system or appliance. For example, coverage for ductwork is capped at $1,000, while coverage for water heaters is limited to $1,500. These limits are detailed along with exclusions in plan documents and should be reviewed carefully, as customers will be responsible for repair or replacement charges that exceed plan limits or include items excluded from coverage. These individual limits are generally in line with coverage offered by other home warranty companies.
 
When homeowners file a claim using their home warranty from Fidelity National, they are not able to choose their own repair person; instead, the company will contact a service person from their network within 48 hours. However, Fidelity National does not make clear how long the service provider has to contact a homeowner. Many customers report that service usually takes several days to get a response to a service request. While Fidelity National claims that it will attempt to expedite emergency service requests, no specific guidelines are provided.
 All contractors that Fidelity uses are fully licensed and carry both general liability insurance and workers’ comp. 
All service providers registered with Fidelity National Home Warranty are required to be licensed contractors for the trades they service, carry $1 million in general liability insurance, and provide proof of workers’ compensation insurance or a waiver.
