
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Fifth Third Bank—its somewhat odd name reflects the merger of two institutions, the Fifth National Bank and the Third National Bank, in 1908—is headquartered in Cincinnati, Ohio. Serving both individual and commercial clients, it has a strong bricks-and-mortar presence in 10 states in the Midwest and Southeast, including Fla., Ga, Ill., Ind., Ky, Mich., N.C., Ohio, Tenn., W.Va. This comprehensive review can help you determine if this large regional bank is the right choice for your financial needs.
 More than 50,000 free-fee ATMs No minimum deposit to open a checking or savings account No minimum balances to earn APY Interest bonuses available on savings High monthly maintenance fees High balance requirements to waive monthly fees Low APY on interest-bearing accounts Monthly debit card service charge 
Fifth Third Bank appeals to fairly well-heeled clients in its 10-state region who want to bank with a large, well-established bricks-and-mortar institution. It’ll best fit you if you:
 
Fifth Third Bank carries pretty much the full array of deposit accounts and services to meet the needs of consumers. These include:
 
Fifth Third Goal Setter Savings Account
 
As an introductory savings vehicle, the Fifth Third Goal Setter Savings Account has a lot to offer. With this account, you start by setting your savings goal, anywhere from $500 to $25,000. You can open the account with no minimum deposit, although you will need to fund it within 45 days. Once you reach your savings goal, Fifth Third gives you a one-time interest bonus equal to all the interest you have earned over the life of the account.
 
The APY on this account is low: only 0.01% for balances up to $50,000. In addition, there is no interest paid on balances above $50,000. There is a $5 monthly service charge, which is waived for the first six months (185 days). However, there are several other ways to avoid the charge:
 
Fifth Third Relationship Savings Account
 
The Fifth Third Relationship Savings Account is set up to reward customers who handle both their checking and savings at Fifth Third Bank. This account offers two different APYs, a standard one for customers who only have a savings account, and a higher Relationship APY for those who also have a checking account:
 
This account has a $5 per month service charge, which is waived for customers who also have a checking account (except for the Express Banking Account—see below), who maintain a minimum $500 monthly balance, who are under age 18, or who enroll in military banking.
 
When you pair a Fifth Third Relationship Savings Account with a checking account, you can automatically transfer money from checking to savings.
 
Fifth Third Express Banking
 
While not exactly a checking account, Fifth Third Express Banking provides customers an account with no maintenance fee that offers many of the benefits of a checking account: You can cash checks and make deposits at Fifth Third Bank branches and deposit checks via the mobile app. However, the account does not allow ATM deposits or check-writing. You also receive an Express Banking Debit Card with this account, and there is a $3.95 monthly service fee for the card.
 
While there are no monthly maintenance fees with this account, the services you use each have an associated fee, including in-person check cashing/deposits and mobile deposits. However, these fees are reduced based on the number of transactions you make per month.
 The fees associated with the debit card and basic services like check cashing and deposits mean that many customers will pay more in monthly service fees using the Fifth Third Express Banking than they would with a more traditional checking account. 
Fifth Third Essential Checking
 
This non-interest bearing basic checking account has a lot to recommend it:
 
However, the fees on this account might be a bit expensive. To start, the debit card comes with a $3.95 monthly service charge. There is a monthly maintenance fee of $11, which is reduced to $8 if you have monthly direct deposits of at least $500. You can get your monthly maintenance fee waived entirely in one of seven ways:
 
Despite the lengthy list of options to waive your monthly fee, these requirements are more onerous than those you can find with other banks. In addition, if you need to use an out-of-network ATM, expect to pay $2.75 per transaction.
 
Fifth Third Enhanced Checking
 
This interest-bearing checking account not only pays 0.01% APY on your account balance (with no minimum to earn your interest) but having this account also entitles you better rates on other Fifth Third products. You can receive an additional 0.25% on standard rate 6 month-plus CDs during the initial term, as well as 0.50% lower interest rate on Direct Auto Loans, Home Equity Loans and Lines of Credit, and Personal Loans and Lines of Credit. Enhanced Checking account holders also receive exclusive discounts on Fifth Third Brokerage Accounts, as well as exclusive pricing for identity theft protection.
 
This checking account comes with a $20 monthly maintenance fee, which you can avoid if your deposit and investment accounts have a combined total $20,000 balance at any time during the month, or if you receive monthly direct deposits of at least $5,000. You will also pay the $3.95 per month service charge for the associated debit card, and the $2.75-per-transaction out-of-network ATM fee.
 
Fifth Third Preferred Checking
 
This account is Fifth Third Bank’s high-yield checking option. The more you keep in your Fifth Third Preferred Checking Account, the higher your APY:
 
However, the increased APY comes at a cost. There is a monthly maintenance fee of $25, which can only be waived if your deposit and investment accounts have a combined total balance of $100,000 at any point during the month.
 
That said, the $3.95 per month service charge for Fifth Third’s debit card is waived for Preferred Checking account holders. Fifth Third Bank will also waive the first 10 out-of-network ATM fees you rack up each month.
 
It’s also important to note that the APY for this checking account is lower than the rates you can find at other banks, particularly online banks.
 
Fifth Third Relationship Money Market Savings Account
 
Like Fifth Third’s Relationship Savings, the Relationship Money Market Savings Account is set up to encourage customers to have multiple accounts within the bank. There are two different APYs depending on whether you only have a Money Market account with Fifth Third, or you also have a relationship with the bank—i.e., a checking or savings account as well.
 
Though this is called a Money Market Savings Account, you have the ability to write checks and pay bills from it, as well as conduct your business via mobile banking. There is no minimum balance required to open the account. 
 
This account has a $5 per month maintenance fee, which is waived for any of the following:
 
Fifth Third Bank offers customers a number of CD options, with a range of terms and rates. The CD rates can also be improved for current Enhanced Checking Account holders, as those customers are eligible for an additional 0.25% on standard CDs with terms longer than six months. Fifth Third offers several CDs with a minimum deposit as low as $500.
 
The featured CDs have higher rates, but require a higher minimum deposit of $5,000.
 
Standard CD rates vary based on their term length.
 
These rates can vary by geographical location, and the rates listed here are those offered by the Central Ohio Fifth Third Bank affiliates as of March 30, 2020.
 
Fifth Third Bank offers four different credit cards (all MasterCards) to meet the needs of its customers, including two cashback rewards cards, a no-fee card, and a secured credit card:
 
Fifth Third Bank is an excellent option for those who seek financing or investment services. It also offers:
 
You can reach live customer service agents via phone at 1-800-972-3030 from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. EST Monday through Friday, and from 8 a.m to 5:30 p.m EST on Saturday.
