
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
As you compare lenders, credit unions may not be your top choice. But many credit unions are easy to join and have plenty to offer—including a range of products, strong customer service, and competitive interest rates.
 
Oregon-based First Tech Federal Credit Union was founded in 1952 by technology execs. It was the first credit union to offer a mobile banking app and provides financial services to companies like Amazon.com, Microsoft, Google, and more. ﻿﻿
 
Although First Tech has multiple loan options, this review will focus on the unsecured personal loan option. It’s a flexible, competitive loan with stand-out features. Our in-depth review can help you decide if First Tech Federal Credit Union’s personal loan is right for you.
 Quick decision Minimal fees Allows joint application More competitive APR elsewhere Must be a member No ability to prequalify Late payment fees 
You may choose from the following secured and unsecured personal loan options: 
 In an unsecured loan, the lender will loan funds based on borrower qualifying factors—such as credit history, income, work status, and other existing debts. Secured loans require collateral to back them. 
If you have an existing bank account, or a linked account from another bank, you can receive the funds by the following business day, according to a representative. 
 
Personal loans have a number of features including:
 
To qualify for a personal loan, you must be a member. Luckily, the process to join is easy and takes less than 10 minutes. You can join the credit union before or after completing the application, according to a representative.﻿﻿
 
Membership is also available nationwide by joining the Financial Fitness Association or Computer History Museum. First Tech covers the membership fee, according to a representative. To qualify for a personal loan, you will have to open a savings account with $5.﻿﻿
 
You can apply for a personal loan online, by phone, or in-person at a local branch. Unfortunately, there isn’t an option to check rates without a hard inquiry on your credit—which temporarily lowers your credit score. ﻿﻿
 
The online application asks for the following details:
 
To submit the online application, you will have to accept disclosures and sign. Once approved, you can receive the funds via direct deposit by the next business day if you have an existing bank account. 
 
Yes, you may refinance any of First Tech Federal Credit Union’s personal loans, according to a representative.
 First Tech Federal Credit Union’s personal loan is an attractive option if your credit score is less than perfect and you’re looking to borrow a smaller amount. Few lenders offer loan amounts as low as $500 with an APR capped at 18% and minimal fees. At the same time, depending on your creditworthiness, you might find better rates elsewhere. Borrowers will also need to become a member of the credit union to be eligible for a loan, though their membership requirements aren't as strict compared to others. First Tech also offers borrowers flexibility with the ability to apply jointly, change the payment due date, and refinance the loan later. Plus, the credit union’s unemployment protection may offer some comfort if you’re worried about job stability.