
The term first-time homebuyer generally refers to an individual who purchases a principal residence for the very first time. First-time homebuyers often qualify for special benefits such as low down payments, special grants, and assistance with paying closing costs that are sponsored by state and federal governments. Many lenders also offer first-time homebuyers with incentives and special loans.
 
As mentioned above, a first-time homebuyer is generally an individual who purchases a home for the very first time. This home is deemed the homebuyer's principal residence—the primary location that a person inhabits. It may also be referred to as their primary residence or main residence. Keep in mind, though, that a principal residence may not always be an actual home. For instance, it could be a boat that someone resides on full-time.
 
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) expands that definition even further. According to the agency, a first-time homebuyer is:
 
First-time homebuyers who fall into any of these categories may be eligible for certain government-sponsored programs that can offer financial assistance.
 
As noted above, there are certain lenders that provide first-time homebuyers with certain perks such as special loans. For instance, first-time homebuyers with low- to moderate-income levels may qualify for grants or loans that don't require repayment as long as the borrower remains in the home for a certain period of time. Closing cost assistance may also be available to certain individuals depending on their circumstances. All of these options are provided through government-sponsored programs. Eligibility varies based on homebuyers' credit scores, income levels, and local requirements.
 If you feel you've been discriminated against by a mortgage lender based on race, religion, sex, marital status, use of public assistance, national origin, disability, or age, you can file a report with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or HUD. 
A first-time homebuyer may be able to withdraw from their individual retirement account (IRA) without incurring the early-distribution penalty, which applies to IRA distributions that occur before the IRA owner reaches 59.5 years old.﻿﻿ The purchase does not need to be a traditional home in order for the individual to qualify as a first-time homebuyer, but it must be the principal residence. For example, it could be a houseboat that you intend to use as your main residence. The maximum amount that may be distributed from the IRA on a penalty-free basis for this purpose is $10,000. This is a lifetime limit. For married couples, the limit applies separately to each spouse. This means that the combined limit for a married couple is $20,000.
 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Archives. "HUD HOC Reference Guide." Accessed Oct. 20, 2020. IRS. "Publication 590-B (2019), Distributions from Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)." Accessed Oct. 20, 2020.