
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
If you’re looking for a simple rewards card with no annual fee, the First National Bank American Express card could be a good fit. It has an easily-earned, if small, one-time offer for new cardmembers, and offers flat 1.5% cash back rewards on all purchases.
 Get a one-time $100 automatic statement credit when you spend $500 in the first 3 billing cycles. The First National Bank American Express Card is not one of our top-rated cash back credit cards. You can review our list of the best cash back credit cards for what we think are better options. Small, easily-earned one-time offer Simple and decent rewards Almost no benefits $25 redemption minimum 
The First National Bank American Express card is best for someone who wants a credit card that earns rewards simply and consistently on all routine purchases. You’ll earn 1.5% cash back on every purchase you make, with no cap on the rewards you can earn. Rewards are automatically redeemed for statement credits once you reach 2,500 points or $25 in rewards. 
 
You earn a one-time $100 statement credit if you spend $500 on the First National Bank American Express card within the first three billing cycles after opening an account—which usually means within the first three months. That bonus is small compared with cards that dangle bonuses of $300 or more, but those bigger incentives usually require far higher spending. This bonus gives you a 20% return on required spending, which is notable. 
 
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average consumer spends $372 per month on food consumed at home. If you used your card to pay for your groceries, you could reach the $500 threshold in under two months. 
 
The rewards structure on this credit card is very straightforward; you earn 1.5% cash back on every purchase you make. The only transactions for which rewards aren’t granted are cash advances, finance charges, balance transfers, or other services provided by First National Bank. 
 
Once you’ve accrued 2,500 points or $25 in cash back your rewards, First National Bank will automatically issue you a statement credit at the end of that billing cycle. Credits are issued in increments of $25. 
 
To maximize your rewards, use the First National Bank American Express card for all of your recurring and usual expenses, such as utility bills, groceries, clothing, entertainment, and gas. To gauge what such spending might yield in rewards, let’s assume you spend the amounts reported for the average household by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics for key household expenditures often charged to a credit card. Those spending amounts are as follows:
 
This totals $15,892 in spending. If you used the First National Bank American Express card to pay for all of the purchases, and so earn 1.5% in cash back, you’d have $238.38 in rewards for the year. 
 
This credit card is issued by First Bankcard, a division of First National Bank of Omaha. As a small card issuer, First Bankcard is not included in the J.D. Power Credit Card Satisfaction Study, even in its ranking of regional banks.
 
You can reach customer service by calling 888-530-3626. 
 
The First National Bank American Express card offers standard security features you can expect from most credit cards, including: 
