
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  First Midwest Bank 
Founded in 1940 with the slogan “The Friendly Bank,” First Midwest Bank offers products and personal loan services to consumers in 27 states, but in four of those states applicants are only allowed to use the loan for home improvement purposes. Still, the bank offers competitive rates and flexible repayment terms.﻿﻿ 
 
Even if you reside in one of the states that First Midwest Bank services, you should shop around to see whether its offer is the best fit. To aid you in your search, we’ve reviewed important details such as rates, repayment terms, and fees to help you with your final decision.
 No application or origination fees Fast approval times Joint applications allowed Not available nationwide High minimum loan amount No prequalification available  First Midwest Bank 
First Midwest offers personal loans for most purposes depending on where you reside. Applicants from Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, and Wisconsin may only use personal loans for home improvement projects via Midwest’s Express Personal Loan for Home Improvement product.
 
In the remaining 23 states that First Midwest Bank services—Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, and Virginia—borrowers may use personal loans for most reasons. This includes debt consolidation, wedding planning, and vacation expenses. 
 
Borrowers may be approved for a personal loan in as little as 24 hours, and the bank will send the loan proceeds within a few business days. 
 
First Midwest Bank claims most loan decisions are completed within 24 hours. Factors for approval depends on whether you apply for a personal loan during business hours and if you can provide all required documentation.
 
You can submit an application with a cosigner—ideally with a higher credit profile than yours—to increase your chances of receiving a lower rate. 
 
First Midwest Bank’s $150 documentation fee is rolled into your final APR. 
 
Borrowers can apply for a First Midwest Bank personal loan online or at any of the bank’s brick-and-mortar branches. In addition to credit requirements, applicants need to be at least 18 years old and a U.S citizen or permanent resident.
 
Here’s what you can expect during the process: 
 
Your loan may be approved within 24 hours, and you should receive loan funds within a few business days. 
