
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The First Premier Bank Gold Mastercard is an unsecured card for people who want to establish or rebuild credit. However, the trade-off for not putting down a security deposit is sky-high fees.
 The First Premier Bank Gold Mastercard is not one of our top-rated credit cards for bad credit. You can review our list of the best credit cards for bad credit for what we think are better options. Card activity reported to credit agencies Free FICO Score access Sky-high fees Extremely high APR Costly credit limit increase fee 
Your fees are dependent on the credit limit you qualify for: 
 
To put those fees in perspective, let’s say you were approved for this card with a $600 credit limit. In your first year as a cardholder, you’d pay: 
 
All told, you’d pay $224.20 in non-refundable fees. Given this high cost, you may want to consider applying for a secured card instead. Even though secured cards require a security deposit, the deposit is refundable, so you get the money back. The Secured Mastercard from Capital One has no annual fee and a minimum security deposit of $49 for qualified applicants. If you make your first six monthly payments on time, you may qualify for a higher credit line. 
 
According to a May 2019 survey by CNBC Select and Morning Consult, nearly one in four Americans reported being unable to get approved for a credit card. The most common reasons for being denied credit include insufficient credit history and missed payments. 
 
If you’re one of the millions of people who have struggled to get a credit card, the First Premier Bank Gold Mastercard is an option for building or rebuilding your credit. First Premier Bank reports payment activity to the credit bureaus. Making on-time payments will help you qualify for other lines of credit later on. 
