
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Flagstar Bank is an offshoot of Flagstar Bancorp. It was chartered in 1987 as a federal savings bank and is the third-largest savings bank in the U.S. It operates 160 branches in California, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin. Wondering if Flagstar Bank is a good bank for you?
 A robust financial institution with a considerable number of options Relationship bonuses Vast ATM network Below-average interest rates Physical branches in only four states Possibility of substantial overdraft fees Due to COVID-19, some Flagstar branches are currently drive-thru only. 
In general Flagstar Bank is best for those who want a financial institution where they can do their banking and have access to everything from wealth management services and mortgages to estate planning and tax preparation. It’s a particularly strong fit for those who:
 
As one might expect from a large financial institution with a large array of accounts, products, and services, Flagstar Bank offers: 
 Accounts, rates, and availability can vary by location. 
Flagstar Bank’s SimplyChecking account is its no-interest, starter account. It requires a $50 minimum deposit to open, but there is no monthly service fee and no minimum balance requirement. It comes with a free debit/ATM card. Also, as mentioned, you can snag one of Flagstar’s relationship bonuses if you set up automatic payments for some of its loans or keep a minimum balance across your deposit accounts.
 
Should you run a negative balance, beware of the fees. There’s a $36 fee for each instance of an overdraft or nonsufficient funds, and the maximum combined number of overdraft and nonsufficient funds fees is five in a given day. That’s a total of $180 in fees when you’re already low on cash. And it doesn’t end there. Should your balance be overdrawn for more than a day, there’s something called a $6 consecutive days overdrawn fee. Flagstar also charges a $2.50 out-of-network ATM fee, which is on top of any ATM operator surcharge fees.
 
Flagstar Bank’s SimplyOne Checking account is a no-interest “checkless” account that eliminates the possibility of overdrafts due to forgotten checks and never charges nonsufficient fund fees. It allows for online banking and bill pay, has a mobile app, and comes with a free debit/ATM card. There’s a $5 monthly maintenance fee that can’t be waived.
 
Flagstar Bank’s SimplySelect Checking account currently offers a 0.01% APY for balances under $10,000 and a 0.02% APY for $10,000 and above. It’s not much, given that you have a $10 monthly maintenance fee, which can be dropped if you meet one of the following criteria:
 
There is a $50 minimum opening deposit amount. When it comes to ATM fees, Flagstar Bank charges a $2.50 out-of-network ATM fee. The first two non-network ATM fees will be waived for each billing cycle. It comes with a free debit/ATM card, and account holders who are 50 and older get one box of free checks per year. It also doesn’t charge you for paper statements.
 
SimplyMax Checking is Flagstar’s checking account with the most perks. The $2.50 ATM fee is dropped entirely, plus you’ll get up to $20 a month reimbursed on out-of-network ATM fees. Another perk is that you receive a free box of checks a month. There is a $50 minimum opening deposit. The interest rates aren’t anything to write home about: 0.01% APY for balances under $5,000, 0.03% APY for balances $5,000 to $24,999, and 0.4% for $25,000 and higher.
 
However, more perks mean higher monthly account fees. The SimplyMax Checking comes with a $25 monthly maintenance fee, which can be waived if you do one of the following:
 
Flagstar’s SimplySavings account is its base-level, no-frills account. The good thing about it is that there’s a $1 minimum deposit to open an account online and no minimum requirement to open an account at a branch. It has a 0.03% interest rate no matter how much you put in it, and there is a $3 monthly service fee that can be waived if you do one of the following:
 
Flagstar’s High-Yield Savings is a bare-bones high-yield savings account that offers a wee bit of interest and currently starts at 0.02%. The monthly maintenance fee is $3, which can be waived if you either maintain an average monthly balance of $300 or have a personal checking account through Flagstar. There’s a $1 minimum to open an account online, and there’s no minimum deposit requirement to open an account at a branch. 
 
Flagstar’s Foundation Savings Plus account is for those with at least $10,000 to save. The interest rates are higher than the national average but hardly competitive with savings rates from some other financial institutions. The current rates are as follows: 
 
There’s a $15 monthly maintenance fee, which would be dropped if you either have a personal checking account or keep at least a minimum of $10,000 average daily collected balance. 
 
Flagstar’s custodial account, SimplyKids Savings, gives minors the chance to learn how banking works and teaches them how to manage their money. Anyone age 22 or younger can open an account. There’s a free debit/ATM card for kids who are 13 and older, and parents or guardians can shuffle money between parental and minor checking accounts for free. There’s no monthly maintenance account fee, and you only need a $1 deposit to open an account online.  
 
Money market accounts typically have a lot of the same features as savings and checking accounts but with higher interest rates. While Flagstar’s APY for its SimplyMoney Market account is slightly higher than its checking, it’s lower than the national average. The rates are as follows: 
 
There’s a $1 minimum deposit to open an account online, and there’s none at all if you open one at a physical branch. However, note the $10 monthly account fee. This ongoing fee could be dropped if you have a Flagstar personal checking account or keep a $5,000 daily average in the account. 
 
If you have a chunk of cash that you can afford to keep stashed away for a set period of time, you might want to consider a CD. It can be a good way to earn a little more interest. 
 
Flagstar offers two groups of rates: standard and preferred. To get preferred rates you’ll need to keep a combined $5,000 or more in checking, savings, and money market accounts. The CD terms with the most attractive rates are 13 months and 49 months.
 
A neat feature of Flagstar’s CDs is that you have the option to automatically transfer the interest earned to your checking, savings, or money market accounts. The flip side of doing this is that you won’t enjoy the growth of compound interest. 
 
Should you need to pull money from a CD before it matures, you’ll get pegged with an early withdrawal penalty, which varies.
 
The current rates for Flagstar Bank’s CDs are as follows: 
 
Flagstar Bank offers a handful of credit cards, including cash-back rewards cards, a balance transfer card, and a secured credit card.
 
Balance Transfer Credit Card
 
Cash-Back Credit Cards 
 
Student Credit Card 
