
Form 1040-V is a payment voucher that taxpayers send to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) along with their tax return if they choose to make a payment with a check or money order. Mailing in a payment is an option if there's a figure on the "Amount you owe" line of your Form 1040, 1040-SR, or 1040NR. Alternatively, filers can send in their payments electronically, thus alleviating the need to file Form 1040-V.﻿﻿
 
The payment voucher at the bottom of Form 1040-V should be detached and mailed with your tax return and payment. The voucher asks for four main pieces of information.﻿﻿
 
All pages of Form 1040-V are available on the IRS website.﻿﻿
 
The IRS accepts checks or money orders to cover the amount due on your tax return. They should be made out to "United States Treasury." To avoid any problems processing your payment, make sure that your name and address appear on the check or money order. You should also include a daytime phone number and your Social Security number on the payment. If filing a joint return, write the SSN listed first on your Form 1040, 1040-SR, or 1040NR.
 
The IRS recommends writing the amount paid in the following format on the right side of the check: $XXX.XX. Writing with dashes ($XXX—) or lines ($XXX xx/100) is not advised.﻿﻿
 The IRS has multiple mailing addresses that accept tax returns and payments. You can find the appropriate address for your state or territory on page 2 of Form 1040-V.  
There are multiple IRS mailing addresses, depending on the state or U.S. territory in which you reside. You can find the appropriate address for your state on page 2 of Form 1040-V. Mail your Form 1040-V, tax return, and payment to that address but do not staple or otherwise attach the form to your return.﻿﻿
 
The IRS does not accept cash payments by mail. However, you can make an in-person payment with cash at various retail partners. These locations accept payments of up to $1,000 per day.﻿﻿ However, before making a payment this way, you must first register with ACI Payments Inc.﻿﻿
 
You can avoid filling out Form 1040-V, and ensure that your payment is processed more quickly, by paying through the secure IRS webpage.﻿﻿
 
The IRS allows you to pay electronically in one of three ways. With IRS Direct Pay, you can pay your amount owed by having it drafted from your savings or checking account. This option allows you to schedule a payment up to 30 days in advance if you don’t want the amount deducted immediately.﻿﻿
 
The IRS also allows you to make a payment via debit or credit card. It uses third-party companies to process those payments, which charge a flat fee for debit card transactions and a percentage-based fee for credit card payments.﻿﻿
 
A more secure payment method, according to the IRS, is the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS). It uses three pieces of identification—your taxpayer identification number (TIN) (for individuals this is usually your Social Security number), a personal identification number (PIN), and an internet password—along with a secure browser. You have to enroll in EFTPS, which can take up to five business days to process.﻿﻿
 Internal Revenue Service. "Form 1040-V." Accessed Jan. 24, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Pay With Cash at a Retail Partner." Accessed Jan. 26, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "ACI Payments, Inc." Accessed Jan. 24, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Paying Your Taxes." Accessed Jan. 24, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Pay Your Taxes by Debit or Credit Card." Accessed Jan. 26, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS)." Accessed Jan. 24, 2020.