
Form 4952: Investment Interest Expense Deduction is a tax form distributed by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) used to determine the amount of investment interest expense that can be deducted, as well as any interest expense that can be carried forward to a future tax year.﻿﻿
 
The IRS has different rules taxpayers must follow depending on where interest comes from and whether it is investment, personal, business, or mortgage-related. If an investor pays or accrues interest on a loan and then uses the proceeds for several different purposes, the taxpayer may have to allocate the interest to ensure that the right interest rule is used.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Form 4952: Investment Interest Expense Deduction must be filed by individuals, estates, or trusts seeking a deduction for investment interest expenses. That means if you borrow money for an investment, you may be able to get a tax break. You can claim the interest on the investment as a deduction. Interest income may result from money borrowed specifically to purchase investments like parcels of land, commercial or residential investment properties, stocks, and non-tax-exempt bonds.﻿﻿
 
There are three parts to Form 4952:
 
The final figure from Part III is transferred to line 9 of Schedule A.﻿﻿
 The IRS limits the investment interest expense deduction to the taxpayer's net income from investment. 
According to the IRS, the following instances serve as exceptions to filing the form:
 
In addition, the following investments do not qualify:
 
The IRS provides a downloadable copy of Form 4952: Investment Interest Expense Deduction.
 Internal Revenue Service. "About Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense Deduction." Accessed Jan. 27, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Form 4952: Investment Interest Expense Deduction," Page 3. Accessed Jan. 27, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 403 Interest Received." Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Form 4952: Investment Interest Expense Deduction," Page 1. Accessed Jan. 27, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Form 4952: Investment Interest Expense Deduction," Page 4. Accessed Jan. 27, 2020.