
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
If you have bad credit or don’t have an established credit history, secured credit cards—which require a security deposit—are a common option. But with the Fortiva credit card, you can potentially qualify for an unsecured card without a security deposit, even if you have less-than-perfect credit. There are annual fees and account maintenance fees, but your payment history is reported to the major credit bureaus, which can help build your credit, and you can review your credit score online.
 The Fortiva Credit Card is not one of our top-rated credit cards for bad credit. You can review our list of the best credit cards for bad credit for what we think are better options. No security deposit required Access to credit score Extremely high fees, even for a subprime credit card No rewards program Won’t raise credit limit on request 
So, simply to get the card and use it for the first year, you could have to pay up to $334 in annual and account maintenance fees. What’s more, unlike a secured card, where you can eventually get the security deposit back, the fees you pay with the Fortiva credit card are not refundable. With so many fees, you may be better off with a low-cost secured card. For example, the Secured Mastercard from Capital One has no annual fee, monthly maintenance fees, foreign transaction fees, or authorized user fees. You can put down a refundable security deposit of $49, $99, or $200, and you may qualify for a higher credit limit after making your first six monthly payments on time. 
 
The Fortiva card is designed for people with poor credit. If you’re in that category and want a credit card without having to put down hundreds of dollars as a deposit, this could be an option for you. Unlike secured cards, the Fortiva card allows you to get a revolving line of credit without a security deposit. 
 
The Fortiva credit card has several basic benefits that are common in the credit card industry: 
 
The Fortiva credit card is issued by The Bank of Missouri. As a smaller card issuer, The Bank of Missouri is not rated in the J.D. Power Credit Card Satisfaction Study. 
