
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Affiliated with Freedom Financial Network, a company that provides consumer advocacy services, Freedom Plus is an online lender providing loans starting at 7.99% annual percentage rate (APR). Applicants who don’t live in states where Freedom Plus disburses loans will instead be directed to the company’s lender partners, who will walk them through their options.
 
Our Freedom Plus personal loan review will go over important details such as fees and the application process so that you can make an educated decision about whether to move forward.
 Option to apply with a co-borrower Ability to receive one-on-one help Doesn’t charge a prepayment penalty Charges an origination fee High minimum loan amount Must work with lender partners in some states 
Freedom Plus personal loans are available for many purposes, including financing a wedding, car repairs, relocation expenses, home improvement projects, medical bills, debt consolidation, and other types of major purchases.
 
The lender may approve your loan on the same day that you apply, and you’ll get your loan proceeds within 48 hours of approval.﻿﻿
 
Freedom Plus allows co-applicants for its personal loans. Having one can help you with your chances of getting approved for a loan, particularly if you may not meet certain qualifications due to your credit score, income, or other financial factors.
 
Freedom Plus lets applicants fill out a simple application form and speak with a loan consultant, who will work with them to determine the rates and terms available based on their financial information.
 
Freedom Plus asks applicants to fill out a short form so they can check what they qualify for. A loan consultant will speak with you over the phone to complete the application process. Here’s what to expect: 
