
If you have maxed out your annual contributions to your 401(k), individual retirement account (IRA), or other tax-deferred retirement accounts, you may now be looking into a variable annuity. Before you buy one, though, consider all the benefits and shortcomings of these complicated insurance products. Here is a quick rundown.
 
There are two broad categories of annuities: immediate and deferred.
 
With an immediate annuity, you make a lump-sum payment, and the insurance company starts paying you a monthly income for a specified number of years or for the rest of your life. The amount of the payments is based on your age and other factors.﻿﻿
 
With a deferred annuity, you invest your money in a lump sum or a series of payments and watch it grow over time. The earnings on the money you contribute are tax deferred until you make a withdrawal or start taking a regular income.﻿﻿
 
Both immediate and deferred annuities can be either fixed or variable. Fixed annuities pay a predetermined rate of interest on your money, as spelled out in the annuity contract. Variable annuities invest in a portfolio of what are called “subaccounts,” similar to mutual funds, that you select, and their value fluctuates accordingly.﻿﻿
 
So how does a variable annuity work? Well, as with many investment products, variable annuities have their upsides and downsides.
 
It gets worse.
 As an alternative to a fee-laden variable annuity, consider a mutual fund in an ordinary, taxable account. Your money will be more accessible in an emergency. 
Annuities can be a useful place to invest some money if you’ve exhausted all other tax-deferred retirement plan options. However, in many cases you might be better off buying a low-fee mutual fund in a taxable account.
 
There are numerous insurance companies out there feeding off the uneducated investor by collecting excessive fees. If you’re invested in an annuity that’s charging you annual expenses of more than 2.3%, it may be time to extricate yourself if you can get out without a punishing surrender fee.
 
Despite all the bad press annuities get due to misleading sales techniques and inadequate disclosure, there are some worthy products on the market. They are commission free, have low expenses and no surrender charges, and offer good investment choices. If you have your heart set on an annuity, shop around until you find the right product at the right price.
 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know," Page 3. Accessed July 12, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know," Page 5. Accessed July 12, 2020. Texas.gov. "INSURANCE CODE: TITLE 7. LIFE INSURANCE AND ANNUITIES: SUBTITLE A. LIFE INSURANCE IN GENERAL: CHAPTER 1108. BENEFITS EXEMPT FROM SEIZURE: SUBCHAPTER A. GENERAL PROVISIONS." Accessed July 12, 2020. Florida Legislature. "TITLE XV: HOMESTEAD AND EXEMPTIONS." Accessed July 31, 2020. New York State Department of Financial Services. "Re: Exemption of Annuity Contract Proceeds from Creditors N.Y. Ins. Law § 3212(d) Question Presented: Is the owner of a non-qualified commercial individual annuity protected from creditors?" Accessed July 12, 2020. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know," Pages 3-4, 6. Accessed July 12, 2020. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know," Page 10. Accessed July 12, 2020. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know," Pages 10-12. Accessed July 12, 2020. Annuity.org. "Annuity Fees and Commissions." Accessed July 31, 2020.