
In the corporate world, the only number that really matters at the end of the day is the bottom line. For taxpayers, the bottom-line number on their tax returns is just as important.
 
There are three main components that determine this number: income, deductions and credits. After these first two components have been computed and all deductions subtracted from income, any remaining income is assessed the appropriate amount of tax. But this final number is not the bottom line for many taxpayers, because their actual tax liability can be reduced further dollar-for-dollar by the various tax credits to which they may be entitled.
 
In this article, we will look at the available tax credits to help you determine which you can use to help pad your wallet.
 
What Are Tax Credits?Tax credits are dollar-for-dollar reductions in the amount of tax that you owe to the government. These credits are much more effective at reducing your tax than deductions, because deductions only reduce the amount of taxable income that will be assessed, while tax credits reduce your tax liability.﻿﻿
 
Tax credits fall into two main categories: refundable and non-refundable. Refundable credits pay back the excess difference to the taxpayer as a refund if the amount of the credit exceeds the total amount of tax that is owed. Non-refundable credits can only be credited against your tax liability for that tax year; any excess amount is lost.﻿﻿
 
For example, if you owe $1,500 in tax but have a tax credit of $2,000, then you will get a refund of $500 if the credit is refundable and nothing if it is non-refundable. As with deductions, most tax credits have an income threshold phase-out schedule that reduces and eventually eliminates eligibility for the credits for high-income taxpayers.
 
Refundable Tax CreditsHere are two examples of available refundable tax credits. They are:
 
Non-Refundable Tax CreditsThere are quite a few tax credits that fall into the non-refundable category. Some are more common than others, and they differ in amount and complexity. Many of these credits are offered as tax incentives for certain types of activities, such as higher education and adopting a child.
 
Here is a breakdown of the major non-refundable credits:
 
If you think your situation calls for the use of any of these credits, check the IRS website for further information.
 
ConclusionThere are a great many rules and provisions regarding the eligibility and limitations of the various tax credits that are available. Make sure that you use every available tool to help keep your hard-earned dollars where they belong - in your wallet.
 
Find out how to decrease your individual tax burden in our Income Tax Guide feature.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Credits and Deductions for Individuals." Accessed Feb. 2, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 608 Excess Social Security and RRTA Tax Withheld." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Lifetime Learning Credit." Accessed April 30, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "American Opportunity Tax Credit: Questions and Answers." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "American Opportunity Tax Credit." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Foreign Tax Credit." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Adoption Credit at a Glance." Accessed Feb. 4, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled at a Glance." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 602 Child and Dependent Care Credit." Accessed Feb. 4, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Savings Contributions Credit (Saver’s Credit)." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Plug-In Electric Drive Vehicle Credit (IRC 30D)." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Credits and Deductions for Individuals." Accessed Feb. 3, 2020.