
Looking to give a holiday gift that will help set a young one on the right financial path? A savings bond or 529 account contribution probably won’t be the gift that gets the most attention on Christmas morning, but it just might end up being the most appreciated. Parents, grandparents, and other interested adults can give financial gifts to children that can help secure their futures, whether it’s saving for a first car, college, or a down payment on a house.
 
Sam Davis, partner/financial advisor with TBH Global Asset Management, notes that financial gifts have merit beyond the obvious monetary rewards. “Parents and grandparents should consider making financial gifts because they can help children achieve something that would otherwise not be possible,” explains Davis. “This can include things like medical school, which has now become unaffordable for many or helping a child get through a short-term, hard financial situation. It can also include, however, things like trips around the world, which can help better a child's understanding of global dynamics.”
 
Whether your financial gift helps a child pay for college, travel across Europe for the summer, or sparks an interest in saving and investing, your child or grandchild will thank you because, as Davis notes, “You are personally invested, physically and financially, in the things that are important to them.”
 
Savings bonds make excellent financial gifts because they can grow steadily by earning interest. Treasury securities are types of debt instruments that include Treasury bills, notes, bonds, Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS), and savings bonds. Most Treasury securities are called “marketable” securities because they can be bought and sold in secondary markets after they are purchased from the Treasury.﻿﻿
 
Savings bonds differ from other Treasury securities in a few ways:
 
The money you pay for a savings bond represents a loan to the U.S. government. In exchange for the loan, the savings bond continues to earn interest for up to 30 years. Any time after 12 months, the savings bond can be redeemed for its face value, plus any interest it has earned; however, if the bond is redeemed before it is five years old, you will forfeit the last three months’ interest.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Savings bonds are available as Series EE or Series I bonds, both of which accrue interest monthly and compound interest semiannually. The biggest difference between the two is the interest rate you receive. Series EE bonds issued on or after May 1, 2005, earn a fixed rate of interest.﻿﻿ The interest rate of Series I bonds is based on both a fixed rate of return and a variable semiannual rate, indexed for inflation.﻿﻿ EE bonds are guaranteed to double in value from their issue price no later than 20 years after their issue date to reward long-time bondholders.﻿﻿
 
You can purchase a digital savings bond as a gift through the TreasuryDirect website, a secure, web-based system operated by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Although the process is a bit more complicated than it used to be when you could purchase paper savings bonds with the help of financial institutions, here are the basics for buying digital savings bonds:
 
You will need to know the recipient’s legal name, Social Security number, and TreasuryDirect account number. For a minor under years to receive a savings bond as a gift, the parent or legal guardian must set up a Minor Linked Account within their own TreasuryDirect account. If the child’s parent/guardian does not set up an account (for whatever reason), you can still buy the bond, hold it in your own account’s “Gift Box” and transfer it at a later date.﻿﻿
 
The reason you need to provide the child’s Social Security number is that the bond applies to the recipient’s annual bond purchase limit—not yours. The annual purchase limit for savings bonds is a combined $10,000 in Series EE electronic bonds, $10,000 in Series I electronic bonds and $5,000 in paper Series I bonds.﻿﻿
 
It’s no secret that post-secondary education is expensive. College costs are increasing at about two times the rate of inflation each year, and the trend is expected to continue. According to the College Board, the average cost of tuition and fees (not including room and board) for the 2019-2020 school year was $10,440 for in-state public colleges, $26,820 for out-of-state public colleges and $36,880 for private, not-for-profit colleges.﻿﻿
 
“One of the best ways to help a child financially while limiting your own tax liability is the use of 529 college plans,” Davis says. 529 College Savings Plans are tax-advantaged plans that allow families to save for future college expenses. These are typically state-sponsored investment plans, and each state has different requirements and benefits, including tax advantages. There are two types of 529 plans: savings and prepaid plans.
 
“I strongly advise my clients to fund 529 plans for the unsurpassed income tax breaks,” says Davis. “Although the contributions are not deductible on your federal tax return, your investment grows tax-deferred, and distributions to pay for the beneficiary's college costs come out federally tax-free. Rules for 529s do vary by state, and I would encourage everyone to understand their state’s rules. For example, your own state may offer some tax breaks also (such as an upfront deduction for your contributions or income exemption on withdrawals) in addition to the federal treatment."
 
In December 2019, President Trump signed the Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement Act (SECURE Act)" designed to improve the retirement system for Americans. Part of the Act made changes to 529 plans.﻿﻿
 
Now, qualified higher education expenses, for which 529 plans mat be applied, include expenses for Apprenticeship Programs. The Act has also introduced distributions for “Qualified Education Loan Repayments,” which can be used to pay the principal and/or interest of qualified education loans but limited to a lifetime amount of $10,000. This limit is per-person, but an additional $10,000 may be distributed as a qualified education loan repayment to satisfy outstanding student debt for each of a 529 plan beneficiary’s siblings.﻿﻿
 
Savings bonds and 529 contributions are just two of many different financial gifts that are appropriate for children. You can also consider giving the following:
 
For 2020, you could give up to $15,000 per year ($30,000 if you and your spouse gave together) to as many people as you want, without any tax consequences to you – including a gift to a 529 account.﻿﻿ Because tax laws are complicated, work with qualified tax professionals. For 2021 that limit may be increased to keep up with inflation. A front-seat approach can ensure that your family can bestow financial gifts while at the same time minimizing tax consequences.
 U.S. Department of the Treasury. "Treasury Securities & Programs." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "Comparison of TIPS and Series I Savings Bonds." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "Savings Bonds As Gifts." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "Series EE Savings Bonds." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "Series I Savings Bonds." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "May 2005 and Later (EE Bond Rates and Terms)." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "How to Buy a Gift Savings Bond in Treasury Direct." Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. "FAQs Concerning the Change in the Annual Purchase Limit for Savings Bonds." Accessed March 28, 2020. College Board. "Trends in College Pricing 2019," Page 9. Accessed March 28, 2020. U.S. Congress. "Public Law 116-94," Division O: Section 302. Accessed March 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Frequently Asked Questions on Gift Taxes." Accessed March 28, 2020.