
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  Great Lakes 
Our Take
 
Along with its parent company Nelnet, Great Lakes is one of the largest federal loan servicers, managing over 40% of the outstanding debt held by student loan borrowers. Great Lakes has been the target of many borrower complaints, with borrowers saying the servicer mishandled their payments and misreported their credit information.
  Great Lakes 
When it comes to managing your federal student loans, your loan servicer plays a big role in your debt repayment. Your servicer is who you go to if you have questions, if you need to change your payment plan, and to make payments. 
 
One of the biggest loan servicers is Great Lakes Educational Loan Services. Together with its parent company Nelnet, Great Lakes is responsible for managing nearly 40% of the outstanding debt held by student loan borrowers. ﻿﻿
 
You can find out who your loan servicer is by looking up your information on the National Student Loan Data System or by calling the Federal Student Aid Information Center at 1-800-433-3243. ﻿﻿
 
If Great Lakes is your loan servicer, here is what you need to know. 
 Due to the government’s new Next Gen Business Process Operations initiative, Great Lakes and its parent company Nelnet will no longer service federal student loans after December 2020. If Great Lakes is your current loan servicer, The Department of Education will assign you a new loan servicer. 
Loan servicers aren’t lenders. In the case of federal student loans, the Department of Education is your lender. Your loan servicer is the company the Department of Education assigns to handle billing and customer service issues. You cannot choose your own loan servicer⁠—one is selected for you after your loan is disbursed.﻿﻿
 
Great Lakes Educational Loan Services—more commonly known simply as Great Lakes—is one of 11 companies that are currently authorized to service federal student loans. As one of the largest student loan servicers, Great Lakes works with more than 6,000 schools and millions of students nationwide. ﻿﻿
 
While Great Lakes does offer private loan processing for other lenders, its primarily known as a federal loan servicer. Currently, Great Lakes services both Federal Family Education Loan Program (FFELP) loans and Federal Direct Loan Program loans, including the following loan types:﻿﻿
 
If you have Great Lakes as your loan service, you can contact its customer service department if you have any questions or issues about the following topics: ﻿﻿
 
Great Lakes allows you to make payments in several different ways: 
 
To make online payments, follow these simple steps: 
 
To sign up for an account, click on “Sign Up” on the top right of the screen at MyGreatLakes.org. Then, enter your Social Security number and birth date. The site will prompt you to create a username, password, and PIN number. 
 
Once your account is verified, you can select your loan account and schedule a payment. You can decide to make a one-time payment, or set up recurring automatic payments. If you can, automatic payments are a good idea. When you enroll in autopay, you’ll get a 0.25% interest rate discount. 
 
When it comes to your student loan payments, there are rules that apply to all student loan servicers. All outstanding interest and fees, if applicable, must be paid first, before the servicer can put any of your payment toward the principal. 
 
If you make extra payments, the excess is automatically applied to the accrued interest since your last payment. If there is any money left over, it’s applied to the principal of the loan with the highest interest rate. If you’d prefer the excess be applied to a different loan, you can change your preferences online under your account Excess Payment Preferences. 
 
Great Lakes Educational Services has been in business for more than 50 years, and has a “C” rating with the Better Business Bureau.﻿﻿ It is worth noting that critics have argued that there’s an inherent conflict of interest when a ratings organization such as the Better Business Bureau receives revenue primarily from the businesses that it grades, which opens the door for those ratings to be suspect.
 
Great Lakes is a large servicer and has experienced some issues over the years. According to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s (CFPB) 2019 Student Loan Ombudsman Report, the CFPB handled 6,600 federal student loan complaints between September 1, 2018, and August 31, 2019. Approximately 4% of those complaints were about Great Lakes, making it one of the most-complained about federal loan servicers. ﻿﻿
 
In May 2020, the Student Borrower Protection Center filed a class-action lawsuit against Great Lakes, Equifax, TransUnion, Experian, and VantageScore. The lawsuit alleges that Great Lakes mishandled CARES Act pandemic relief efforts by illegally providing inaccurate information about millions of its customers to Equifax, TransUnion, and Experian—the three major credit bureaus—damaging borrowers’ credit. ﻿﻿
 Great Lakes is one of the companies named in a class-action lawsuit. The suit alleges that Great Lakes mishandled CARES pandemic relief efforts by illegally providing inaccurate information to the major credit bureaus, damaging student loan borrowers’ credit reports. 
To contact customer support, call 1-800-236-4300. Representatives are available Monday through Friday 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. CST. You can reach customer service through the mobile app or secure email, as well.
 
In addition, you can mail general correspondence (not payments) to:
 
Great LakesPO Box 7860Madison, WI 53707-7860
 
Unfortunately, you can’t pick your federal loan servicer. However, there are two ways to get a new servicer if you’re unhappy with the one you have:
 
If you want a new loan servicer but want to keep your federal loan benefits, consolidating your loans with a Direct Consolidation Loan may be a smart solution. You can choose a new repayment term, may be eligible for a new payment plan, and you’ll get a new loan servicer. 
 
Your interest rate is based on the weighted average of your current loans, rounded up to the nearest one-eighth of 1%, so you won’t save money by consolidating your debt. But, it can be worthwhile, especially if you have multiple federal loans to juggle. And you may become eligible for repayment plans you didn’t qualify for before. ﻿﻿
 
If you’re willing to give up federal loan benefits like income-driven repayment plans, another option is student loan refinancing. With this strategy, you work with a private lender to take out a loan for the amount of your existing student loan debt and use it to pay off your old debt. The new loan will have different repayment terms, including the interest rate and monthly payment. 
 
If you have good credit and reliable income, you could qualify for a lower interest rate than you have now. Over time, refinancing your debt could even allow you to save money. If you think that refinancing sounds like the right thing for you, check out our list of the best refinancing lenders.
 You don’t get to pick your federal loan servicer; one is assigned to you. If you have Great Lakes and are unhappy with the service you’ve received, know that its contract ends in December, and you’ll be assigned to a loan servicer at that time. To minimize any issues with your loan servicer, make sure you pay all of your minimum payments on time, review your account statements, and contact your servicer right away if you notice any errors. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of student loan lenders. We collected over 45 data points across more than 15 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their education needs.
 MarketWatch. "Elizabeth Warren, Cory Booker Take Aim at Student Loan Company Merger." Accessed July 1, 2020. Federal Student Aid. "Who's My Student Loan Servicer?" Accessed July 1, 2020. Great Lakes. "Who We Work With." Accessed July 1, 2020. Great Lakes. "Frequently Asked Questions." Accessed July 1, 2020.