
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Green Dot Bank is an online bank that offers competitive rates through its high-yield savings account and unlimited cash-back rewards via its spending account. In business since 1999, Green Dot is part of the Green Dot Corporation.
 Competitive APY on high yield savings account Online and mobile purchases earn 2% cash back Early access to direct deposited paychecks No overdraft fees Monthly fee if you don't meet minimum Out-of-network ATM fee Steep fee for paper checks No joint accounts 
Green Dot is best for people who do most of their banking online or through mobile access. It may be a good fit for those who want:
 
Green Dot is not a full-service online bank, but it does offer two accounts and a secured credit card:
 
The Unlimited Cash Back Bank Account is a spending account that earns rewards for card purchases. It's not technically a checking account but acts similar to one, including check writing privileges. Paper checks cost $5.95 for a pack of 12.
 
The main draw is the unlimited 2% cash back earned on select online purchases. Not all spending earns cash back, such as airline tickets, gift cards, and bill payments.﻿﻿
 
Besides a complimentary debit card, customers also get access to services including:﻿﻿
 
A major drawback of the Unlimited Cash Back Bank Account is the $7.95 monthly fee, which is waived by spending $1,000 the previous month on your card. If you tend to use your debit card to pay for most purchases, this may not be hard to accomplish, but keep in mind that not all spending counts.﻿﻿
 
Another hurdle is depositing cash into your account. While you can access fee-free ATMs for withdrawals, that's not an option for deposits. For cash deposits, customers need to head to a participating retailer, which may charge up to $5.95 per deposit. Other options are direct deposits, mobile check deposits, and electronic transfers from another bank account.﻿﻿
 To access your cash-back rewards balance, you need to keep your account open at least 12 months and it needs to be in good standing at the time. Any accrued rewards are redeemable once a year at the end of a 12-month period. 
When you open a spending account, you also get access to a high-yield savings account. This account has no monthly fee and currently earns 2% APY on all balances of $10,000 or less, much higher than the national average.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
However, interest is calculated differently than most other banks and is only applied to your account once at the end of a 12-month period. Interest is calculated by taking the average daily balance of your savings account for each day over a 12-month period, starting when you opened the account, and multiplying that by 2%.﻿﻿
 
Like all banks covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), money held in Green Dot accounts is FDIC-insured up to $250,000 per depositor. Keep in mind the $250,000 is for all accounts, including any you may have with Green Dot Corporation's other banking subsidiaries.
 Bank transfers are subject to limits. The first is limited up to $100 but after that, customers can transfer up to $1,000 with a total monthly limit of $3,000.﻿﻿ 
Green Dot also offers a secured credit card designed to build credit and increase credit scores through responsible use:
 
Along with its main product staples, the online bank offers some other banking products including:
 
For help, customers can call 866-795-7597. For disputes on unauthorized charges on accounts, you need to fill out a dispute form.
 
Green Dot has no physical bank branches, but customers can access their account 24/7 online or through its mobile app, which is available for iOS (3.5 stars) or Android (4.3 stars).
 
To open an account with Green Dot, go to its website or download the app and fill out the account application. You also have the option to open an account in-store at participating retailers, which include Walmart, 7-Eleven, and Rite Aid, among others.﻿﻿
 
Similar to other banks, you'll need to provide personal information to open an account, like your mailing address, phone number, Social Security number, and date of birth.
