
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Green Dot Platinum Visa Credit Card is a secured credit card that doesn’t require a credit check when you apply. The card reports your credit activity to the three major credit bureaus, making it possible to build or rebuild a credit history. Credit limits range from $200 to $5,000, based on card issuer approval and the submission of an equal security deposit. The card comes with a $39 annual fee.
 The Green Dot Platinum Secured Visa Card is not one of Investopedia's top rated rated secured cards. Please see our list of the best secured credit cards for what we consider to be better options. Can make security deposit or payments at participating retailers nationwide Credit limit of up to $5,000 with equal security deposit and issuer approval No credit check when applying for the card Reports to the three major credit bureaus Annual fee Making payments on the phone or at retailers comes with fees No credit card rewards Replacement card fee 
The Green Dot Platinum Visa Credit Card may be a good fit for those looking for a secured credit card to help build or rebuild their credit score. The card doesn’t require a credit check, which means people who have negative information on their credit report don’t have to worry about clearing the credit report hurdle. 
 
This card could be ideal for someone who can’t make online payments and prefers to make payments in person at participating nationwide retailers, even though there is a $4.95 fee per transaction. People who can make online payments without a problem may be able to find a better secured credit card that doesn’t charge an annual fee.
 
Green Dot is the issuing bank of the Green Dot Platinum Visa Credit Card. It was not ranked in J.D. Power’s 2019 U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study. 
