
Group-home care is a type of care given to a group of people with similar disabilities within a residence. This kind of treatment option can be offered for those with intellectual disabilities, medical conditions, or a combination of both. Group home care is also frequently helpful for elderly people who cannot be left alone for safety reasons due to the risk of falls or other injuries.
 
Group-home care can include both custodial care and care that is provided by skilled and medically trained professionals. A group home can be a viable option for those who are prevented from performing activities of daily living and whose family members may not be able to provide daily care.
 
Patients who receive group home care can have a wide variety of medical conditions. Alzheimer's disease, dementia, and Parkinson’s disease are common conditions experienced by people in group homes. The term “group home care” is sometimes also used to refer to a facility or home-like location that is used to care for youths in foster care or who have special needs.
 
Some long-term insurance plans may include certain levels of coverage for group home care. These plans can be obtained individually, through an employer, or through an organization such as AARP.
 
Caring for a family member with a disability can be very stressful and overwhelming at times. The obligations and responsibilities of providing this level of care can be extremely challenging or even impossible for some people to manage—especially if they must work or have other time-consuming obligations.
 
In addition, individuals requiring this type of care may need someone with skills or experience that the average family member may lack. As a result, family members of a person who needs care may seek alternatives that offer an affordable option for services performed by qualified professionals. These facilities or programs generally would be overseen by administrators who are familiar with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, as well as all relevant insurance requirements and procedures.
 
However, group-home facilities can be very expensive unless supplemented by long-term care insurance or public health program such as Medicare. Still, the cost may be lower than for an assisted living facility or similar options because, generally, a group home involves paying for a room or part of a room as opposed to an apartment. Low-income individuals may qualify for some assistance through local or state programs, or through an SSI domiciliary care program.
