
According to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the number of student loan borrowers age 60 and older climbed at least 20% between 2012 and 2017. Furthermore, more than 75% of states saw at least a 50% uptick in outstanding student loan debt. Taken together, these two figures suggest a disturbing trend that could mean economic hardship for millions of older Americans in the years ahead if they're stuck with loan repayment after retirement.﻿﻿
 
The vast majority of older adults with student loan debt did not take out the loans for their own higher education. The CFPB report found that 73% obtained or co-signed loans on behalf of a child or a grandchild, while just 27% said they took out loans for themselves or their spouses.﻿﻿
 
Co-signers of loans can find themselves in a difficult situation if the loan recipients fail to honor the agreed-upon payment schedules. By co-signing, they have put themselves on the hook for payments, just as if the loan had been theirs alone.﻿﻿
 
While up to 15% of your Social Security payments can be garnished to repay a student loan debt, your monthly benefit cannot sink below $750.﻿﻿ Furthermore, the garnishment cannot occur until two years after you default on a loan, giving you ample time to contact the loan servicer to modify the repayment plan.
 
Since most student loan debt cannot be eradicated by filing for bankruptcy protection (it is possible in some rare cases), pre-retirees who owe balances often face some or all of the following ramifications:﻿﻿
 Having too much student loan debt can make it difficult to get a loan for other purposes, such as buying a car. 
Fortunately, there are some constructive steps you can take both before and after you take out or co-sign for a student loan.
 
Before co-signing for a loan, talk with your co-borrower to determine how much you'll need to borrow and agree on a realistic timetable for making payments. Discuss how scholarships, less expensive colleges, or other options might ease the debt burden.
 
Before you commit, make sure you can afford to cover the loan payments yourself if your co-borrower is unable to. If other family members offer a safety net, see if they'll put that promise in writing, just in case they forget.
 
After you borrow, be sure the loan servicer furnishes regular statements that show the balance due, payments made, the interest rate, and the payoff date. File a complaint with the CFPB if you do not receive this information on a timely basis or if you’re unduly bombarded with harassing calls or letters.﻿﻿
 
Deferment and forbearance programs can let you temporarily stop making payments if you experience hard times, such as difficulty feeding your family or paying other household bills. Consolidating multiple student loans may result in smaller payments.
 
There are also other repayment options that might help, including income-based repayment (IBR), income-contingent repayment (ICR), pay as you earn (PAYE), and revised pay as you earn (REPAYE). Some programs forgive an existing balance after 20 years, or if you pass away.
 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.gov. "A nationwide look at how student debt impacts older adults." Accessed June 28, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.gov. "Snapshot of older consumers and student loan debt," Page 9. Accessed June 28, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Snapshot of older consumers and student loan debt," Page 10. Accessed June 28, 2020. AARP. "Student Loan Debt Can Sink Your Retirement Plan." Accessed June 28, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Snapshot of older consumers and student loan debt," Page 12. Accessed June 28, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Snapshot of older consumers and student loan debt," Page 25. Accessed June 28, 2020. AARP. "Rising Student Loan Debt Prevents Saving, Buying a Home." Accessed June 28, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Having a problem with a financial product or service?" Accessed June 28, 2020.