
A Health Savings Account (HSA) is like a personal savings account, but it can only be used for qualified healthcare expenses. To be eligible, you must be enrolled in a High-Deductible Health Plan (HDHP). Health Savings Accounts also have some important tax advantages.
 
Many Expenses Qualify. Eligible expenses include a wide range of medical, dental and mental health services. They are explained in detail in IRS Publication 502, Medical and Dental Expenses.
 
Others Can Contribute. Contributions can come from you, your employer, a relative or anyone else who wants to add to your HSA. The Internal Revenue Service does, however, set limits. For 2020, for example, the limit is $3,550 for individuals and $7,100 for families, plus an additional $1,000 "catch-up" contribution for anyone age 55 or older by the end of the tax year.﻿﻿
 
Pre-Tax Contributions. Contributions are typically made with pre-tax dollars, through payroll deductions at your employer. As a result, they are not included in your gross income and are not subject to federal income taxes. In most states, contributions are not subject to state income taxes.
 
Tax-Deductible After-Tax Contributions. If you make contributions with after-tax dollars, you can deduct them from your gross income on your tax return, reducing your tax bill for the year.
 
Tax-Free Withdrawals. Withdrawals from your HSA are not subject to federal (or in most cases, state) taxes if you use them for qualified medical expenses.﻿﻿
 
Tax-Free Earnings. Any interest or other earnings on the money in the account is tax free.
 
Annual Rollover. If you have money left in your HSA at the end of the year, it rolls over to the next year.﻿﻿
 
Portability. The money in your HSA remains available for future qualified medical expenses even if you change health insurance plans, go to work for a different employer, or retire.
 
Convenience. Most HSAs issue a debit card, so you can pay for prescription medications and other eligible expenses right away.﻿﻿ If you wait for a bill to come in the mail, you can call the billing center and make a payment over the phone using your debit card. 
 
The High-Deductible Requirement. A High-Deductible Health Plan, which you are required to have in order to qualify for an HSA, can put a greater financial burden on the patient than other types of health insurance. Even though you will pay less in premiums each month, it could be difficult—even with money in an HSA—to come up with the cash to meet the deductible for a costly medical procedure.
 
Pressure to save. Some people are reluctant to seek healthcare when they need it because they don't want to spend the money in their HSA account.
 
Taxes and penalties. If you withdraw funds for non-qualified expenses before you turn 65, you'll owe taxes on the money plus a 20% penalty.﻿﻿ After age 65, you'll owe taxes but not the penalty.
 
Recordkeeping. You must keep receipts to prove that your withdrawals were used for qualified health expenses.
 
Fees. Some HSAs charge a monthly maintenance fee or a per-transaction fee, which varies by institution. While typically not very high, the fees do cut into your bottom line. Sometimes these fees are waived if you maintain a certain minimum balance.
 The money in your Health Savings Account can be rolled over year after year so it's available for future expenses. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 969." Accessed Oct. 5, 2020. HealthCare.gov. "Health Savings Account (HSA)." Accessed Oct. 5, 2020.