
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Low cost with additional coverage helps make Home Warranty of American a popular choice for those looking for a home warranty provider.
 Based on our review of over a dozen home warranty companies, Home Warranty of America was not one of the best companies we found. To see other options that may be better, visit our list of the best home warranty companies. No age restrictions or home inspections required Nationwide coverage Customer service can help troubleshoot most common repair issues by phone Offers add-on coverage on things like limited roof leak repairs that some of the other companies do not Payout caps only cover up to a certain amount in the aggregate during the coverage period Subjective determination of what amount is paid out for covered items 
Home Warranty of America was established in 1971 with headquarters located in Lincolnshire, Illinois. The company is part of Direct Energy and offers home warranty plans nationwide with coverage for houses, townhomes, and condominiums.
 
Home Warranty of America was established in 1996 and is well-known in the home warranty industry. The company offers four warranty plans that are designed to help protect you against the high cost of unexpected repair bills on appliances and major systems in the home.
 
We compared Home Warranty of America and other similar home warranty companies and found that Home Warranty of America has a slightly lower average annual cost as compared to some of its competitors. The company also provides additional coverage options on some items, such as stand-alone freezers and limited roof leak repairs. Our review considers price, coverage, benefit caps, and more.
 
Home Warranty of America offers a selection of two base plans throughout the United States. The two plans are further broken down depending on whether you choose to pay a $75 or $100 trade call fee (TCF), for a total of four options.
 
All Home Warranty of America plans include:
 Review what is covered under home insurance and appliance warranties to make sure you understand how the home warranty compliments gaps in coverage. 
Additional Coverage Options Available:
 
Home Warranty of America has two available base plans that cover a long list of items, regardless of which plan you choose, and plans are available to real estate professionals, too. You must request a quote online to view current prices, but unlike some companies, it is easy to get a quote without the pressure of a customer service representative constantly calling you.
 
The company offers two options for paying their Trade Call Fees (TCF) for each plan. The TCF is the amount of money you pay upfront when a service provider arrives at your house to make repairs. You can choose either a TCF of $75 or $100. The higher the service fee, the more you will pay when your service provider arrives, but you will get a lower monthly fee—or you can pay a little higher monthly fee and get the lower TCF.
 
Home Warranty of America covers almost all breakdowns of appliances, home systems, and home features (doorbells, garage door openers, etc.) that occur from normal wear and tear, however, there are several exclusions.
 
As an example, valves for showers and tubs are included, while their associated faucets and drain mechanisms are not. Plans do not cover water lines to refrigerator ice makers, or water and ice dispensers. You can see a complete list of coverages and exclusions by viewing a sample of Home Warranty of America’s Buyers Plan Coverage.
 Be sure to read through the list of exclusions so you aren’t caught off-guard when an uncovered item breaks. 
Unlike some companies, Home Warranty of America’s payout caps vary depending on what system or item needs repair and will only cover up to a certain amount in the aggregate during the coverage period. This means that, while they may pay up to $2,000 for an electrical system repair, they will only pay for the repair once during the period of coverage. Likewise, they will only pay up to $1,500 for a heating system or furnace and up to $1,000 for appliance items like stand-alone freezers, again, once per contract period.
 
While payout caps vary (and there are a lot of different ones, so read over your policy closely), the amounts are average for the industry on most of the items and systems that are covered.
 
An appointment with a service provider is typically set within 48 hours from when your service request is placed, or at a mutually agreed-upon time between you and the service provider. They also provide emergency service and will help you troubleshoot problems on the phone when possible.
 
Home Warranty of America uses a network of service providers, so you do not get to choose who will make your repairs. The company also has a national account with Carrier Corporation for HVAC equipment and an account with GE for the replacement of household appliances.
 
There is support service available 24/7/365, and filing a claim is a simple, straightforward process that is done online or by calling 888-492-7359.
 
Home Warranty of America encourages customers to call and speak with a service technician since they are trained to help troubleshoot most problems over the phone. Doing so may help you solve your issue without having to pay the trade call fee. If you do need a service technician, you will generally hear from them within 24 hours.﻿﻿
 
Home Warranty of America does not currently have a rating with the Better Business Bureau, as the company is currently under review due to numerous complaints filed for such things as slow repair times and unresponsive customer service. BBB states that they will issue a rating once the complaints are evaluated.
 
To provide a comparison between Home Warranty of America and the competition, we chose American Home Shield. Both companies provide similar warranty coverage, have around-the-clock service, and comparable add-on coverage.
 
When it comes to the types of coverage the companies offer, American Home Shield and Home Warranty of America have plans that are quite similar. Both allow you to choose either a $75 or $100 trade call fee, and American Home Shield also offers a third option of $125.
 
Both companies let you choose additional coverage for items such as swimming pools and spas, with American Home Shield offering the additional coverage for a fee of $87, while Home Warranty of America charges $150. In addition to these add-ons, Home Warranty of America has its OrangePlus upgrade for $75 that provides coverage amounts for things like building code and permit violations and the removal of old parts and appliances that have been replaced through the company’s warranty plans.
 
Although both companies are somewhat similar in the coverage that they offer, Home Warranty of America becomes the clear winner when shopping for similar coverage at an affordable price, with a cost of $494 a year versus $600 for American Home Shield.
 Although Home Warranty of America has a high number of unresolved complaints filed with the Better Business Bureau, the company has been around a long time and is well-known in the home warranty industry.