
Under normal circumstances, the number of payments you can miss on your mortgage is four before the foreclosure process begins, but this also depends on a number of factors, including your lender's particular policies and the housing market.
 
However, during the coronavirus pandemic, the federal government has protected mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Authority (FHA) or backed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac against foreclosure for 60 days.﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
The practices and policies of your specific lender will affect how long you can go without paying before being forced into foreclosure. If your lender has a large portfolio of low-risk loans, it may be more lenient regarding missed payments, it or might make allowances to individual borrowers. Often, such a lender will forgive an occasional missed payment and may not refer your situation to the housing authorities until you continue to miss more payments.
 
If the lender has a portfolio of high-risk loans, however, the possibility of foreclosure proceedings beginning even after just two missed payments is higher. Even if you are a low-risk borrower, the proceedings may be triggered by standards due to the overall default risk of the mortgage pool owned by the lender.
 Mortgage lending discrimination is illegal. If you think you've been discriminated against based on race, religion, sex, marital status, use of public assistance, national origin, disability, or age, there are steps you can take. One such step is to file a report to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
The general state of your local housing market is another factor that plays a role in the timing of foreclosure proceedings. If the neighborhood or region has many pending foreclosures, it is likely you will be able to stay in your home longer, as local housing authorities and the courts may be backlogged and lack the resources to process so many cases at once. In such situations, there have been cases where people have missed 10 or more monthly payments before finally losing their homes.
 
If you are in default, your mortgage servicer should contact you multiple times to attempt to alleviate the situation. Typically, by the 36th day after your last payment, the lender contacts you by phone. By the 45th day after you miss a payment, your mortgage servicer must contact you in writing and provide information regarding the options available to you.﻿﻿
 Although most lenders and services will not begin the foreclosure process over a single missed payment, missing even one mortgage payment does put you in breach of your mortgage agreement. That’s why it’s so important to communicate with your lender if you are going to be late on a payment or miss a payment. 
While circumstances and location can dictate variances in the timeline of a mortgage foreclosure, there is a template for how it usually happens:
 
Laws governing foreclosure can vary from state to state. In some states, mortgage lenders must meet with borrowers before they can file for foreclosure.
 
Under new guidelines from the federal government, all new foreclosures will be stopped and in-progress foreclosures will be suspended for FHA-insured mortgages.﻿﻿ Foreclosures and evictions on mortgages backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (about two-thirds of all mortgages in the U.S.) are suspended until at least August 31, 2020.﻿﻿
 
Homeowners who are financially affected by the coronavirus crisis can request mortgage forbearance, which can lower or suspend their payments altogether, for up to a year. In addition, during this time, no penalties or late fees will be applied and lenders will not report delinquent payments in a forbearance plan to credit bureaus.﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
If you're facing foreclosure, your best bet is to stay in communication with your lender and talk with them about your situation. They may have programs to help you keep your home, especially if you have been financially impacted by COVID-19.
 Federal Finance Housing Agency. "FHFA Suspends Foreclosures and Evictions for Enterprise-Backed Mortgages." Accessed March 21, 2020. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. "HUD Provides Immediate Relief for Homeowners Amid Nationwide Coronavirus Response." Accessed March 21, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Factsheet on Delinquency and the 2016 Mortgage Servicing Rule." Accessed March 21, 2020. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. "Are You at Risk of Foreclosure and Losing Your Home?" Accessed March 21, 2020. FHFA. "FHFA Extends Foreclosure and Eviction Moratorium." Accessed Jun. 22, 2020. Freddie Mac. "Our COVID-19 Response." Accessed March 21, 2020. Fannie Mae. "Fannie Mae Assistance Options for Homeowners Impacted by COVID-19." Accessed March 21, 2020.