
A personal loan can affect your credit score in a number of ways⁠—both good and bad. Taking out a personal loan is not bad for your credit score in and of itself. But it may affect your overall score for the short term and make it more difficult for you to obtain additional credit before that new loan is paid back.
 
On the other hand, paying off a personal loan in a timely manner should boost your overall score. If you decide to take out one, be sure to research and compare all of your options thoroughly in order to quality for the best possible loan.
 
To understand how taking out a personal loan affects your credit score, you must know how the score is calculated. The most widely used credit score by lenders is FICO, which was created by the Fair Isaac Corporation. FICO scores range between 300 and 850.﻿﻿
 
The scores are calculated based on five factors: payment history, amounts owed, length of credit history, new credit, and credit mix. The exact percentages may vary among the three major credit rating agencies, but here is a breakdown of how much weight each factor has in the calculation, according to FICO:﻿﻿
 The three major credit reporting bureaus in the United States that lenders turn to—Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion—provide similar scores on your creditworthiness, but there can be small differences. 
As you can see, obtaining a new personal loan could affect your credit rating. Your outstanding debt has increased, and you have acquired new debt.
 
The credit agencies take note of new financial activity. If, for example, you tried to arrange for a new car loan shortly after taking out a personal loan, your application for a car loan might be rejected on the basis that you already have as much debt as you can handle.
 
Your overall credit history has more impact on your credit score than a single new loan. If you have a long history of managing debt and making timely payments, the impact on your credit score from a new loan is likely to be lessened. The easiest and best way to keep a personal loan from lowering your credit score is to make your payments on time and within the terms of the loan agreement.﻿﻿
 
A personal loan that you repay in a timely fashion can have a positive effect on your credit score, as it demonstrates that you can handle debt responsibly.﻿﻿
 
Perversely, people who are most averse to taking on debt could have lousy credit scores. A person who never acquires debt and pays it off in installments has no payment history.﻿﻿
 You can receive a free copy of your credit reports from the three credit bureaus every 12 months, which you can obtain by visiting www.annualcreditreport.com.﻿﻿ 
As mentioned earlier, credit scores range between 300 and 850. The higher your credit score, the more likely a lender is to approve your loan application and offer more favorable terms, such as a lower interest rate. While each has its own criteria, in general lenders view scores above 670 as an indication that a borrower is creditworthy.﻿﻿
 
FICO scores fall into five categories—poor, fair, good, very good, and exceptional. Here is a breakdown of the ranges:﻿﻿
 
Most Americans (67%) have a credit score of good or better, according to Experian, one of the credit rating agencies. Only 21% have an exceptional rating.﻿﻿
 
Also keep in mind that while your credit score plays a crucial role in helping you qualify for a personal loan, lenders also consider other factors such as the amount of income you earn, how much money you have in the bank, and how long you have been employed.﻿﻿
 
A personal loan will cause a slight hit to your credit score in the short term, but making payments on time will boost it back up and and can help build your credit. The key is repaying the loan on time. Your credit score will be hurt if you pay late or default on the loan. And don't forget that a personal loan may also reduce your borrowing power for other lines of credit. If you've recently taken a personal loan and accidentally made multiple late payments or defaulted on said loan, one of the best credit repair companies might be able to remove the negative marks on your credit report.
 Fair Isaac Corporation. “What Is a FICO Score?” Accessed June 2, 2020. Fair Isaac Corporation. “What's in My FICO Scores?” Accessed June 2, 2020. Fair Isaac Corporation. “How to Repair Your Credit and Improve Your FICO Scores.” Accessed June 2, 2020. Fair Isaac Corporation. “The Importance of Credit History Length.” Accessed June 2, 2020. USA.gov. "Credit Reports and Scores." Accessed June 2, 2020. Experian. “What Is a Good Credit Score?” Accessed June 2, 2020. Experian. "7 Things Lenders Look At Besides Your Credit Score." Accessed June 2, 2020.