
The credit score often referred to as a FICO score is a proprietary tool created by the data analytics company FICO (formerly the Fair Isaac Corp.). FICO’s is not the only type of credit score available, but it is one of the most common measurements most commonly used by lenders to determine the risk involved in doing business with a borrower.﻿﻿
 
FICO does not reveal its proprietary formula for computing the credit score number. But it is known that the calculation incorporates five major components, with varying levels of importance. These categories, with their relative weights, are:
 
All of these categories are taken into account in your overall score. No one factor or incident determines it completely.﻿﻿
 
The category of payment history takes into account whether you have paid your credit accounts consistently and on time.﻿﻿ 
 
It also factors in previous bankruptcies, collections, and delinquencies. It takes into consideration the size of these problems, the time it took to resolve them, and how long it has been since the problems appeared.﻿﻿
 
The more payment issues you have in your credit history, the lower your credit score will be.﻿﻿
 
The next largest component is the amount you currently owe relative to the credit you have available.﻿﻿
 Your credit score is only one factor a lender will consider, but it's a big one. 
Credit score formulas assume that borrowers who continually spend up to or above their credit limit are potential risks.﻿﻿ Lenders typically like to see credit utilization ratios—the percentage of available credit that you actually use—below 30%.﻿﻿
 
While this component of the credit score focuses on your current amount of debt, it also looks at the number of different accounts that you have open and the specific types of accounts you hold. A large total amount of debt from many sources will have an adverse effect on your score.﻿﻿
 
The last three categories are fairly straightforward.
 
The longer your credit accounts have been open and in good standing, the better.﻿﻿ Common sense dictates that someone who has never been late with a payment in 20 years is a safer bet than someone who has been on time for two years.
 
Also, when people apply for credit frequently, it probably indicates financial pressures, so every time you apply for credit, your score gets dinged a little.﻿﻿
 
It is important to understand that your credit score reflects only the information contained in your credit report. Your lender may consider other information in its appraisal.﻿﻿
 
For example, your credit report does not even show your current income or length of employment.﻿﻿
 
However, your credit score is a key tool used by lending agencies. It is important that you keep an eye on your credit report. That is the basis of your credit score, so reviewing it at least once a year and correcting any errors on it are crucial. Additionally, if you find that your credit score is low and need assistance in removing any negative marks, one of the best credit repair companies might be able to help.
 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "What is a FICO score?" Accessed April 28, 2020. myFICO. "What's in my FICO® Scores?" Accessed April 28, 2020. myFICO. "What is Payment History?" Accessed April 28, 2020. myFICO. "What is Amounts Owed?" Accessed April 28, 2020. Experian. "What is a Credit Utilization Rate?" Accessed April 28, 2020. myFICO. "What is the Length of Your Credit History?" Accessed April 28, 2020. myFICO. "Credit Checks: What are credit inquiries and how do they affect your FICO® Score?" Accessed April 28, 2020. myFICO. "What's not in my FICO® Scores." Accessed April 28, 2020.