
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement account, the value of which varies based on the performance of the underlying portfolio of mutual fund-like investments.﻿﻿ A variable annuity is a type of annuity—a financial product that allows an individual to invest money in either a lump-sum payment or scheduled, periodic payments—and then collect a stream of payments at a later time, typically during retirement.﻿﻿
 
You can rollover qualified variable annuities—those established with pre-tax dollars—into a traditional IRA.﻿﻿ Qualified annuities are often set up by employers on behalf of their employees as part of a retirement plan.
 
Non-qualified variable annuities—those established with after-tax dollars—are not eligible for a rollover to a traditional IRA, but you can move them into other types of non-qualified accounts.﻿﻿
 
Variable annuities are investment vehicles that have some life insurance benefits. They are popular in retirement planning because they offer tax-deferred growth and certain guarantees on principal, a future income stream, and a death benefit for heirs.﻿﻿
 
Like other investment products, a variable annuity can be held in either a taxable account or in a tax-advantaged qualified retirement plan. The funds within the variable annuity can be allocated across sub-accounts, which are similar to mutual funds, for participation in the stock market or bond market.
 
Combined with the unique benefit of guaranteed income, annuity contracts are useful as a pension replacement or as a supplement to other retirement income.
 An annuity is a product created and sold by financial companies that gives out a stream of payments to an individual, either at a fixed or variable rate. These products are typically used as an income stream in retirement. 
Several employer retirement plans come in the form of a variable annuity contract such as a 457 or 403(b) plan, especially in the public sector.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ When people change jobs, they can still rollover one of these tax-sheltered annuities to a traditional IRA tax-free.
 
You also have the option to rollover the funds to a Roth IRA. That move will require you to pay income taxes that year on the total amount converted.﻿﻿
 
Variable annuities purchased outside of the workplace can also be rolled over to another qualified annuity via a 1035 exchange. This is a non-taxable transfer often used to gain access to a new annuity contract with different investment options, better riders, or lower expenses. As long as the funds remain in qualified status, no taxes are incurred.﻿﻿
 U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission. "Updated Investor Bulletin: Variable Annuities." Accessed May 1, 2020. U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission. "Annuities." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 575 (2019), Pension and Annuity Income." Accessed May 1, 2020. Annuity.org. "Qualified vs. Non-Qualified Annuities." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Choosing a Retirement Plan: 403(b) Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plan." Accessed May 1, 2020. Horace Mann. "457(b) Retirement Annuities." Accessed May 1, 2020. Pacific Life. "Converting an IRA Annuity to a Roth IRA." Accessed May 1, 2020. Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA). "1035 Exchanges." Accessed May 1, 2020.