
If you’re buying a new car, “no-down-payment” car insurance, widely touted online, could be appealing. After all, your budget may be stretched to the max, and making a big car insurance payment on top of that might seem next to impossible.
 
Unfortunately, the term “no-down-payment” is something of a misnomer. Any major insurer will require that you pay some money upfront before it will cover you—whether the insurer calls that a down payment, a first payment, or something else. Even so, you may be able to find car insurance with a relatively low initial outlay. Here is how to go about it.﻿﻿
 
In many cases, websites that advertise no-down-payment car insurance are misleading—or worse. When legitimate websites refer to no-down-payment car insurance what they often mean is car insurance that requires no more money upfront than the first monthly payment on your policy, which can vary from insurer to insurer and state to state. That’s the definition we’ll use here.﻿﻿
 
Auto insurance policies are typically sold for a term of six months or a year, with the option to renew them after that. Generally, you’ll have a choice of paying the entire premium in a lump sum or as a series of monthly installments. When you take out a policy by making only a first month’s payment, you’ll reduce your initial out-of-pocket costs. However, many insurers charge fees for monthly payments, or offer discounts for lump-sum payments, so it’s generally cheaper in the long run to pay the whole bill upfront. Of course, not everyone can do that.﻿﻿
 
To find a policy with a minimal initial payment, you'll need to shop around. You can get price quotes either directly from insurance companies or through comparison websites that feature a variety of insurers. But before you buy any policy, make sure you’re dealing with a reputable company. 
 
Here are five ways to check out insurance companies:
 You can reduce your insurance costs by opting for no more than your state's minimum liability requirements, but that could be very risky if you're ever in a serious accident. 
If your goal is to make only a first month’s payment to begin with, you can reduce the size of that payment by following these basic guidelines for cutting your car insurance costs.
 
An auto insurance policy consists of several different types of coverage. While the rules vary from state to state, you’ll generally be required to carry some amount of bodily injury and property damage liability coverage in case you’re in an accident in which people or property are harmed. States set minimums for how much liability coverage you must carry, and you’ll save money by buying no more than the minimum. The risk, of course, is that you might get into an accident where those levels of coverage prove inadequate and find yourself involved in a costly lawsuit.﻿﻿
 
Auto policies also include two types of coverage to protect your car: collision, for accidents involving other vehicles, and comprehensive, for destruction caused by fire, vandalism, and other calamities. If you own your car free and clear, these coverages are usually optional, but if you’re still paying off a car loan or lease, they may be required. One way to reduce their cost is to agree to a higher deductible—the amount you’d have to pay out of pocket after an accident. According to the Insurance Information Institute, for example, increasing your collision and comprehensive deductibles from $200 to $500 could reduce your cost by 15% to 30%, while opting for a $1,000 deductible could save 40% or more. Of course, you’re taking the risk that you’ll have that much spare cash on hand if you’re ever in an accident.﻿﻿
 
If you already have a homeowners policy or other insurance, ask your insurer if it offers reduced rates to people who also buy their car insurance there. You might still get a better price by shopping around, but this is one way to save a little money without a lot of effort.﻿﻿
 
Many car insurers offer a long list of discounts to potential customers, typically reflecting a reduced risk. If your car has antitheft devices, for example, you may be eligible for a break. Ditto if you’ve taken a defensive driving course, been accident-free for three or more years, or if you don’t plan to put a lot of miles on the car. The better your credit record, the lower your car insurance rates are likely to be, as well—and the more likely you’ll qualify for “no-down-payment” car insurance in the first place.﻿﻿ 
 The Zebra. "Cheap Car Insurance with No Down Payment." Accessed July 21, 2020. BuyAutoInsurance.com. "Affordable Car Insurance With No Down Payment." Accessed July 21, 2020. National Association of Insurance Commissioners. "A Shopping Tool for Automobile Insurance." Accessed July 21, 2020. Insurance Information Institute. "State Insurance Departments." Accessed July 21, 2020. Insurance Information Institute. "Nine Ways to Lower Your Auto Insurance Costs." Accessed July 21, 2020.