
Credit card delinquency occurs when a cardholder falls behind on making required monthly payments. While being 30 days late is generally considered delinquent, it typically takes two months of missed payments before the information is reported to credit reporting agencies. If an account is reported delinquent, the event can have a negative effect on your credit score and curtail your ability to borrow in the future. However, once one garners a thorough understanding of delinquency, dealing with it is actually quite straightforward.
 
When using a credit card, you must pay a certain fraction of your balance each month in order to stay current on your account. By giving you a line of credit, the credit card issuer is basically providing you with a loan that you must pay down little-by-little each month. By failing to make required monthly minimum payments, the cardholder is breaking the terms of your agreement with the lender and the account becomes delinquent.
 
Delinquency is divided into levels, which are indicative of how many payments the cardholder has missed. These levels are often referred to in terms of days. For example, the day after you miss your first payment, you are one day delinquent. After you miss your second payment, you are 30 days delinquent and so on.
 
Technically, a consumer becomes delinquent after missing a single monthly payment. However, delinquency is not generally reported to the major credit bureaus until two consecutive payments have been missed. Consumers are thus provided a buffer zone and are allowed one misstep without suffering significant repercussions.
 
Make no mistake about it though, a fool-me-twice-shame-on-you type of principle is in effect because being reported to the credit bureaus as delinquent will have a negative impact on your credit score. While the damage might be relatively minimal after only two missed payments, your credit score may fall as much as 125 points after three.
 
Once four payments have been missed, the impact on your credit score will become even more severe, and your account will likely be turned over to collections. The efforts of collectors will surely ramp up after five missed payments, and the possibility of legal action will likely be in play.
 
In addition to suffering credit score damage and being the subject of collection efforts, a delinquent consumer's charging privileges will either be suspended pending payment or revoked permanently, meaning that full payment will mark account closure. While these punishments might seem severe, consider the situation further: someone who reaches this level of delinquency did not pay their credit card bills for five months. A credit card is not a magic piece of plastic that allows for free purchasing, and such behavior is usually not tolerated by any credit card company.
 
Still, just as there is a way to get into delinquency, there is a way to stop and ultimately escape it. Making one minimum payment stops the progression of delinquency and keeps you at your current delinquency level. This is essential to understand because getting reported to the credit bureaus as being 120 days delinquent is far worse than being reported as 90 days delinquent. Thus, if you can pay at least the amount of one minimum payment (generally around 3% of your balance), you should do so.
 
However, this is where one consumer after another gets into trouble, making the same mistakes over and over again. Fortunately, these errors are not hard to avoid when you know to watch out for them.
 
Interestingly, payments less than the minimum have no effect on delinquency, almost as if no payment at all was made. Thus, when people pay a little bit (thinking that it will surely improve their situation) it provides little benefit at all. This trap can be easily avoided, as long as you only make credit card payments greater than or equal to the minimum amount required.
 
Many people confuse the minimum payment required with the total amount due that appears on their bills. The amount due is the total figure that you must pay in order to become current and is likely comprised of multiple minimum payments, so don't refrain from making payments until you have paid the full amount required to bring your account current.
 
In fact, while making one minimum payment keeps delinquency from worsening, making two decreases delinquency. For instance, if you are 90 days delinquent, paying the amount equal to two minimum payments will bring you to 60 days. One minimum will count toward what you owe for the current month, and the other will cover one of the payments that you missed. In order to get out of delinquency completely and become current on your account, you must pay the total of your missed minimum payments plus the current month's minimum.
 
Once you become current on your bill, you will need to get to work reversing the effects of delinquency. Delinquency is like a black eye on your credit report because it signals consumer irresponsibility. However, the more you cover it up with positive usage information, the less glaring it becomes.
 
The best way to infuse positive information into your credit reports is to open a credit card because information about credit card usage is reported to the credit bureaus on a monthly basis. Whether you make purchases and pay for them in full or simply maintain an open card at a zero balance, a credit card will provide you ample opportunity to demonstrate fiscal responsibility.
 If your credit report contains a record of delinquency that did not occur, you can send a credit report dispute to have it investigated and possibly removed. 
Secured credit cards are particularly apt for credit improvement for this because you must place a refundable security deposit in order to open one. This security deposit makes approval guaranteed, provides your issuer protection against default, and erases the need for an expensive fee structure. Additionally, since it's also your credit line, the security deposit ensures that you cannot spend beyond your means.
 
Ultimately, you will not recover from the effects of delinquency overnight; it will take both time and consistently responsible credit card use. Remember to use your money in the most efficient way possible by not making payments below the minimum and understanding the difference between this amount and the total amount due.
 
Once out of delinquency, you must dilute the negative information on your major credit reports and earn the trust of lenders by illustrating to them that you can handle credit without getting into trouble. So be patient, open a secured credit card, use it wisely, and you will eventually regain your previous stature. In the end, delinquency won't seem so intimidating after all.
