
Victoria's Secret, a subsidiary of L Brands Inc. (LB), has its own branded credit card called the Angel card. Here is a discussion of the card's benefits, drawbacks, and the type of consumer for whom the credit card is best suited. It's chief competitors with similar cards are Gap and Lane Bryant.
 
Issued by Comenity Bank, the Victoria’s Secret Angel card can be used for purchases online at VictoriasSecret.com, at a Victoria's Secret store, or in a PINK store. It's also accepted at Bath & Body Works, another chain owned by L Brands, although purchases there don't earn any reward points.
 
Victoria’s Secret cardholders earn rewards according to the value of their purchases, both online and in-store. There are three different reward tiers: Angel, Angel VIP, and Angel Forever, which reflect the amount of money spent on a rolling 12-month period. All cardholders earn one point for each $1 of net new purchases on their Victoria's Secret credit card. Once a cardholder earns a certain number of points—spends a certain dollar amount, in other words—she is upgraded to the next level.
 
The first tier is the basic Angel card. Angel cardholders earn triple points on all bra purchases, free shipping for qualified purchases (above $50), and one triple-point day of their choice. In addition, Angel cardholders get a cash birthday treat each year the card is active and a $10 reward to use on future purchases.
 
The second tier is the Angel VIP card. Cardholders qualify for this tier by earning 250 points on their Angel card in a rolling 12-month period. Angel VIP cardholders accrue points at the same level and rate as an Angel cardholder, and receive the same annual $10 reward and birthday treat, but they accrue additional benefits: a halfway-to-birthday treat of $10 and a 15% discount on the anniversary of their sign-up.
 
The top tier is the Angel Forever card. To qualify, the cardholder must earn 500 points on their Angel or Angel VIP credit card within a rolling 12-month period. Additional perks of being an Angel Forever cardholder include $15 birthday and half-birthday treats and a 20% anniversary discount.
 
(Note: All these benefits are accurate as of July 2019).
 
Other little perks and special events occur each month. To maintain the tier, a cardholder has to keep spending the same amount each year; otherwise, the card reverts to a lower tier.
 Victoria's Secret also offers a PINK Angel card, which carries all the same benefits as the Angel card. 
Like most store-branded credit cards, the Victoria’s Secret Angel charges a hefty amount of interest: as of July 2019, the advertised annual percentage rate (APR) was 27.24%. It's a variable rate, which fluctuates with the prime interest rate. No interest is paid if a cardholder pays off her entire balance by the due date each month, and the payment due date is at least 25 days after the close of each billing cycle.
 
Again, like most store cards, the Angel card has no annual fee, but there are charges for late and returned payments. If a cardholder is late paying her bill, she should expect a fee of up to $39. Fees on returned payments can go as high as $25. Of course, as with any credit card, late payments can damage the cardholder's credit score. Cardholders should thoroughly read their cardholder agreements for full details.
 
Victoria's secret offers card applications on its website. Not everyone is eligible, though. Applicants must be at least 18 years of age, have a valid government-issued photo ID and U.S. Social Security Number, and must be a resident of the United States with a valid mailing address. Comenity Bank verifies personal information and obtains a copy of a consumer's credit report when making its decision to extend credit to a potential cardholder.
 
The credit limit on the card depends on the applicant's personal credit history and finances. That being said, store credit cards often seem easier to qualify for than general-use cards. Since the Angel card doesn't cost anything to own, obtaining and using one responsibly can be a way for someone with a limited credit history to build up a good record.
 Proprietary store credit cards like the Angel are officially known as closed-loop or single-purpose cards. 
As is the case with proprietary credit cards, the Angel card only works with one merchant—Victoria's Secret (and its corporate sister retailers). While it carries various little perks and privileges that make cardholders feel like part of the Victoria's Secret family, its primary benefit is that it accrues points that translate into money for or discounts on future purchases. Often, you have a limited amount of time to use these rewards. So overall, this card is best suited for consumers who already spend money early and often at Victoria's Secret. Those who aren't big fans of the brand will find the Angel card has a pretty limited wingspan.
