
For some consumers, meeting with a mortgage lender face-to-face provides a certain peace of mind. But the popularity of online mortgage companies like Quicken Loans, the largest of the internet-based firms, shows that plenty of folks are perfectly comfortable applying for a loan outside of an office.
 
If you're shopping for a new mortgage or trying to refinance via the web, it's important to realize that not all loan originators have the same approach. Whereas sites like LendingTree and Zillow essentially act as brokers, sending your basic information to multiple mortgage providers, Quicken Loans is a direct lender. 
 
That has its pros and cons. Using Quicken Loans means you won’t receive an onslaught of emails from lenders trying to get your business. Your personal information gets into fewer hands, a big draw for privacy-minded customers.
 
On the other hand, it’s hard to know whether you’re getting the best rate if you don’t have several bids coming your way. Moreover, if you approach more than one direct lender to comparison shop, you could end up with more paperwork—and more queries to your credit report.
 
One advantage Quicken Loans provides is choice. The company, which dates back to 1985, offers conventional mortgages—it offers both fixed-rate and adjustable-rate varieties—as well as specialized products, such as VA and FHA mortgages.﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
In some respects, the process of obtaining a mortgage through Quicken Loans is similar to that of traditional lenders. You begin by calling or chatting with a Quicken Loans mortgage banker. The company uses your credit score and basic financial information to determine the loan options and rates for which you qualify.
 
Before you close the loan, the company has to underwrite the mortgage—that is, verify that your income and employment information is correct and make sure you have adequate homeowner's insurance. It also has to order a home appraisal from a third party.
 
These steps cost money, which is why Quicken requires that borrowers make a "good faith deposit" of between $400 and $750. The good news is that the company deducts the deposit from your other closing costs, so in the end, you may not be paying more than you would with other lenders.﻿﻿
 
Rocket Mortgage, one of Quicken's loan products, offers a different experience. With Rocket, you start the process online and provide information about where you work and do your banking. For many consumers, the company is able to pull pay stubs and bank statements directly from their financial institutions, eliminating the need to scrounge up those documents and send them over.﻿﻿
 
As a result, it's simpler—and significantly faster. Some of the company's first ads in 2016 touted its ability to provide approvals in as little as eight minutes. Rocket Mortgage seems to back off those claims in more recent advertising campaigns, but it's still considerably faster than the traditional loan process.
 
Quicken markets itself as a more convenient alternative to traditional lenders. Rocket Mortgage is certainly a big part of that. You not only get faster approval, but also access to an online portal that lets you get in touch with a lending expert, check the status of your loan, and view information about the closing.
 
Do homeowners have to sacrifice service when working with a banker in another part of the country? According to most industry sources, the answer is decidedly "no." In 2018, J.D. Power, which ranks mortgage originators based on customer satisfaction, awarded Quicken Loans its top spot for the ninth consecutive year.﻿﻿ The company also receives 4.5 stars out of 5 on real estate site Zillow.﻿﻿
 
Over the years, Quicken Loans has built a reputation as a convenient way to get financing to buy a home. Still, it doesn’t hurt to do some shopping around to ensure a competitive interest rate.
 Quicken Loans. "Home Mortgage Loans." Accessed April 9, 2020. Quicken Loans. "Fast Facts." Accessed April 9, 2020. Quicken Loans. "Learn About the Good-Faith Deposit." Accessed April 9, 2020. Rocket Mortgage. "FAQs." Accessed April 9, 2020. J.D. Power. "Mortgage Customer Satisfaction Increases as Digital Plays Larger Role, J.D. Power Finds." Accessed April 9, 2020. Zillow. "Quicken Loans Rating and Reviews." Accessed April 9, 2020.