
In Australia, trust funds are among the nation's most popular investment structures. Although many folks mistakenly believe trust funds are strictly enjoyed by the super-rich, in reality, even moderately well-to-do individuals can use trusts to protect their personal, family, and business assets. But setting up a trust fund can be a complicated effort.
 
For this reason, it's vital to proceed with caution and purpose. In this article, we review the different types of trusts that Australia recognizes along with what you need to do to establish one.
 
The word trust is an umbrella term used to signify a variety of structures—each with its own specific procedures, regulations, and tax considerations. But fundamentally speaking, a trust is a private legal arrangement in which the ownership of one’s assets—such as stocks, bonds, cash, real estate, antiques, and fine art—are parked in an account that's managed by an individual, or group of individuals, for the benefit of another person or persons.
 
The individuals who originally provide the assets are generally referred to as settlors. Those charged with managing trusts and distributing their assigned assets are known as trustees.
 
Finally, those who ultimately receive the assets contained within the trusts are known as beneficiaries.
 
Trusts are mainly created to separate a person's assets from their personal estate. Once a settlor assigns those assets to a trust, they no longer own them, effectively shielding the assets from creditors in bankruptcy proceedings or plaintiffs in lawsuits.
 
Other reasons for creating a trust include:
 
Australia recognizes the following different types of trusts:
 
A family trust (also known as a discretionary trust), one of Australia’s most common small business structures, is ideal for families with private businesses and other income-generating operations. Such trusts give trustees the discretion to decide who receives distributions and how often payouts occur. Accepted in every Australian state, family trusts are relatively easy to establish and operate.﻿﻿
 
A unit trust (also known as a fixed trust) differs from a family trust in that the trustee generally does not hold discretion over the distribution of assets to beneficiaries. These structures divide the trust property into units, similar to shares of stock. Each beneficiary (known as a "unit holder") owns a given number of those units, and at the end of each year, each unitholder receives a distribution from the trust, based on the number of units held. Ideal when multiple families are involved, unit trusts operate somewhat like a company.﻿﻿
 
Another type of fixed unit trust is a public unit trust. In this type of trust, units are offered to the public or listed on a stock exchange or held by 50 or more persons.﻿﻿
 
A hybrid trust bears characteristics of both discretionary and unit trusts. The trustee is empowered to distribute trust income and capital among nominated beneficiaries—as with discretionary trusts. However, the income and capital are proportionally distributed—as with unit trusts—based on the number of units each beneficiary holds. Hybrid trusts are often the favored structures when there are significant investment assets involved, due to their income tax and capital gains tax benefits.﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
Established in Sept. 2006, the special disability trust allows immediate family members and carers to set up a trust to benefit another family member. Before the trust can be set up, the prospective beneficiary must be assessed as severely disabled per the requirements of the trust's legislation.
 
Family members will then be allowed to make private financial contributions for the future and current care of the beneficiary. The trust beneficiary can use the money from the trust to help pay for a variety of expenses, including medical and accommodation expenses.﻿﻿
 
Setting up a family trust can be a straightforward process that you might be able to accomplish using a do-it-yourself online service for a small fee of about $150. Additionally, you'll pay the stamp duty—a state-based tax.﻿﻿ Slightly more complicated structures that require the active management of a corporate trustee can start at around $1,200.
 
In establishing trusts, settlors must take the following steps:
 
List all the holdings, along with their current value, to be placed in the trust. 
 
Designate an individual or financial institution to serve as trustee. Choose wisely, as this person or entity will wield significant legal authority and control over your trust assets.
 Since trustees of discretionary trusts have wide powers, it is essential to choose a responsible and impartial individual to embody this position. For this reason, it may be best to appoint an independent trustee, who has no allegiance to any of the beneficiaries listed in the trust deed document. 
Compile a list of people or entities entitled to receive benefits. Include the percentage breakdown of assets intended for each recipient.
 
A trust deed is a legal document prescribing the rules that govern your fund and the powers of the appointed trustee. It includes the fund’s objectives, specifies original trust assets, identifies the beneficiaries, delineates how benefits are to be paid (either via lump sum or an income stream), details how the trust may be terminated, and establishes rules for operating the trust bank account.
 
Trust deeds must be signed and dated by all trustees, executed according to state or territory laws, and regularly reviewed and updated as required. Deeds should be crafted by professionals with specialized legal and financial knowledge of trusts.
 
Stamp duty is a state-based tax that may be payable on the trust deed, depending on the state or territory. Stamping can be arranged directly through the relevant revenue authority or via a lawyer or accountant in your given state or territory.﻿﻿ 
 
As with other Australian business structures, you will need an ABN (Australian Business Number), TFN (Tax File Number), and a business name for the trust. Depending on the trust type and complexity, you may be required to register it as a company.﻿﻿
 
Once the trust has been established, a trust bank account should be opened in the trustee’s name. The bank may require personal details about the trustee(s) and other parties involved before it will open the account.
 
Once the bank account has been established, the trust becomes operational and can accept contributions or make investments, subject to terms outlined in the trust deed.
 
Trusts have become a common way of structuring financial affairs, and a logical, tax-efficient means of distributing earnings that protect wealth for future generations. It's critically important to crystallize legal relationships and obligations associated with any trust because they are typically irrevocable.
 
While online platforms can offer some guidance, seeking professional advice from a lawyer, accountant, or tax advisor is highly recommended.
 Australian Government Taxation Office. "Trusts." Accessed Oct. 15, 2020. Australian Government Tax Office. "Type of trust." Accessed Oct. 15, 2020. Australian Government Taxation Office. "Trusts." Accessed Oct. 16, 2020. Australian Government Tax Office. "Trust capital gains and losses." Accessed Oct. 15, 2020. Australian Government Department of Social Services. "Special Disability Trusts." Accessed Oct. 16, 2020. Australian Government: Business. "Stamp Duty." Accessed Oct. 15, 2020. Australian Government Tax Office. "Trusts – registering and reporting for tax." Accessed Oct. 15, 2020.