
If you inherit jewelry, there may be sentimental value attached to it. You might be entrusted to safeguard family heirlooms for future generations, or you may be expected to divide them up for the estate of the deceased. Perhaps you want to hold onto some as keepsakes. Alternatively, the jewelry may have been left to you as a valuable resource that can help with, say, the down payment on your first home.
 
Of course, just because a piece is old doesn't necessarily mean it's highly valuable in a financial sense. It might be a coveted collector’s item today, or it may have fallen out of style, diminishing its worth.
 
Other factors, such as today’s gemstone and precious metal prices, quality of workmanship, and the particular manufacturer or designer will also figure into its value.
 
And don’t dismiss costume jewelry; some pieces are worth more than you might think.
 
Regardless of what you plan to do with the inherited jewelry, one of your first priorities should be to determine its value, in part so you can insure it for the proper amount, if necessary. That means getting a professional appraisal.
 
Pretty much anyone can claim to be a jewelry appraiser. There are no federal or state licensing requirements the way there are for real estate appraisers.﻿﻿ So it’s largely on you to determine whether an appraiser is equipped to evaluate your inherited items.
 
That involves more than heading to the nearest jewelry store, since simply working in the industry doesn’t qualify an individual as an appraiser. What’s more, most jewelry retailers don’t have their own gem lab or the instruments required to properly examine a stone and determine its quality. 
 
There are, however, a number of industry groups that require their members to meet certain qualifications and adhere to a code of ethics. You can locate an appraiser in your area by visiting the following websites, listed here in alphabetical order:
 
Aside from having a recognized qualification, the appraiser should also be a graduate gemologist (GG) of the Gemological Institute of America (GIA).﻿﻿ Having a gemological degree means that an individual can identify and grade gem materials. However, it does not, in itself, provide the training required to become a jewelry appraiser. An appraiser should also be knowledgeable about the current jewelry market.
 
A competent appraisal, according to the American Society of Appraisers, should:
 When appraising jewelry, the appraiser should clearly state whether the value being determined is fair market value, replacement value or liquidation value.﻿﻿ 
Putting a value on inherited heirlooms requires a qualified professional. To find an appraiser in your area, contact one of the major industry associations listed above for names. Don't hesitate to ask potential appraisers, “What qualifies you to value this type of property?”
 
Be prepared to pay a premium given the specialist training and equipment required for the job. Costs can range from about $50 to $75 per item or $50 to $150 or more per hour, depending on the items and nature of the appraisal. And given that the prices of precious metals tend to fluctuate dramatically, appraisals should be carried out every few years to keep your insurance coverage up to date. Should you decide to sell your inherited jewelry, knowing its value will help you obtain a fair price for it.
 Jewelers of America. "Guide to Jewelry Appraisals." Accessed May 9, 2020. Gemological Institute of America. "Graduate Gemologist Program." Accessed May 9, 2020. American Society of Appraisers. "Appraisals FAQ." Accessed May 9, 2020.