
While most people know whether they have liability, collision and/or comprehensive coverage, few people pay much attention to their insurance coverage until after they've been in an accident. In this article, we'll go over car insurance coverage and give you some tips to help you get the most for your money.
 
Protecting your assets and your health are two of the primary benefits of car insurance. The following are the main types of car insurance coverage:
 
In addition to the coverage listed above, other optional coverage types include the following:
 
In addition to the specific coverage options that you select, other factors that affect your auto insurance rates include the following:
 
1. Compare Rates for Various Cars
 
If you are shopping for a new car, call your current insurance (or a new insurance company) to compare premiums for the cars. Car insurance costs vary because of the safety record, repair costs and likelihood of theft as well as the price of the car.
 
2. Avoid Gaps in Coverage
 
If you are switching policies, make sure you are completely covered at all times. If you let your insurance coverage lapse by forgetting to make the premium payments, your rates are likely to be increased.
 
3.Claim all Your Discounts
 
If your car has extra anti-theft or safety features such as anti-lock brakes, most insurance companies will give you a discount on your premiums. You may also be eligible for a discount if you have taken a defensive driving class or, if you are a student, you have good grades
 
Before you buy a policy, research your policy provider—regardless of who it is. Numerous firms rate the financial health of insurance companies, and your state also has an insurance website that rates firms based on the number of complaints they have received. (For a comprehensive list of state insurance regulators, visit the Federal Citizen Information Center.)
 
Be a smart buyer: do your homework and check out what a company's policy does and does not cover before purchasing it. Make sure the policy you pick covers the vehicle at all times. Many small insurance companies offer low rates compared to the big ones because of their lower overhead costs. But, when there is an accident, and an insurance claim is filed, these small companies can sometimes be a pain. They may try to wash their hands and say, "it's not covered under your policy." That's not what you want to hear when you really need them after paying your premiums for months. Also, don't go with a local insurance company that doesn't cover out-of-state accidents.
 
When considering any company, big or small, whose costs are lower, also consider their customer service. Further, it's a good idea to investigate the company's financial strength (which directly impacts their ability to pay your claims) through a rating service such as A.M. Best.
 
Also keep in mind that a company offering a discount on the first month or two of premiums will probably make up for that discount with higher rates in the following months. Overall, you want to find the middle ground between price and quality.
 
Don't Overdo It
 
When you talk to any insurance agent or service provider, they are going to try to sell you more coverage so they can make more money. In general, you don't need a high amount of coverage unless you own an expensive vehicle, drive extensively or don't have adequate health insurance. Many insurance companies are able to make easy money off of uneducated buyers who don't know what they want. By using the tips from this article, you won't have to let a smooth-talking agent steal money from your pocket.
 
Having ample and reliable insurance coverage is a very important component of auto ownership: you don't want to experience money problems when you are already going through the trauma of an accident. Be a smart buyer, do the proper research, compare quotes and create a package that suits both your coverage needs and your budget.
 
The following car insurance providers offer great resources for senior drivers such as driver improvement courses and provide discounts on car insurance for seniors: 
 
Shopping for car insurance wisely can help you protect your health, your assets, and your wallet, so make the effort to determine the type and amount of coverage that you need. Also, make sure that you review and understand your policy before you sign on the dotted line. If you plan well, you'll be pleased with the results, should you ever find the need to put your policy to the test by making a claim.
