
Founded in 1999, Netspend is a leading provider of prepaid debit cards, prepaid debit Mastercard and Visa cards, and commercial prepaid card solutions, with over 10 million customers served in the U.S. Netspend cards are not a scam. There are several ways you can apply for a Netspend card. Once you receive your card, you can activate it online or via the phone, just like any other debit or credit card.
 
Netspend prepaid MasterCard and Visa cards are popular prepaid debit cards requiring no minimum balance and no credit check. All transactions made using Netspend cards are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) up to the current coverage limit, and the cards can be used anywhere Debit MasterCard and Visa debit cards are accepted. Cardholders can make in-store purchases, shop over the phone and online, and withdraw cash at ATMs worldwide. (For related reading, see "How Netspend Works and Makes Money")
 
Prepaid debit cards, such as Netspend cards, differ from business credit cards in that you can only spend funds, which you have already preloaded onto the card. In other words, a Netspend card is not a credit card at all but simply a way of making funds that are already in your possession available via credit/debit card electronic payment technology.
 
Credit cards offer a revolving line of credit, which you can typically pay off over time. In addition, outstanding credit card balances accrue interest, which must also be paid off. With a prepaid card, you're spending your own money, whereas using a credit card is like spending borrowed money, which you are expected to pay back with interest at a later date.
 Although different from credit cards, prepaid cards can still be used wherever Visa or Mastercard is accepted if the card has one of these logos. 
Another difference between prepaid debit cards and credit cards is that many credit cards offer spending rewards in the form of points, cash back, or airline miles. Most prepaid cards, including the Netspend Small Business Prepaid Mastercard, do not. However, credit card holders typically have to spend a considerable amount on their credit card to really see rewards benefits.
 
The biggest similarity between prepaid debit cards and credit cards is that they usually have a card network logo on them like Visa® or Mastercard. This means that the card can be used at any place that accepts either of these methods of payment. However, one major difference is that using a Netspend card does not impact a person's credit score, such as a credit card does.
 
Netspend applications are quick and simple, just requiring your name, address, and email address. All applicants are guaranteed approval once the applicant's identity is proven, and new cards are sent via mail within seven to 10 business days.
 
When using the cards in stores, if you choose credit at checkout and provide your signature, the transaction fee for the purchase will be $1 and the funds are deducted from the card account. If you choose debit, you must give a personal identification number (PIN) and you are charged a $2 transaction fee. Individual transaction fees can be avoided by subscribing to premium Fee Advantage Plans, which charge monthly service fees ranging from $5 to $9.95 as of 2015. Fees for ATM cash withdrawals range from $2.50 domestically to over $4.95 internationally.
 
One of the best features of a Netspend card is how easy it is to add funds to the card. Funds can be added to Netspend accounts through direct deposit, bank account transfers, Netspend card account transfers, or through Netspend reload network locations. The only ways to add funds to the account without incurring fees are through direct deposit or through the Netspend online account center.
