
How can you afford to fund a college education when the prices just seem to keep rising—unlike many people's incomes. Paying for college is a challenge for almost every family. But that doesn't mean it can't be done, preferably by getting started early and knowing what you're up against.
 
For the 2019 to 2020 academic year, undergraduate tuition, fees, and room and board were estimated to be close to $21,950 for an in-state four-year public college. At a private non-profit four-year college they were $49,870, according to the College Board.﻿﻿ This is a considerable increase from the figures in 1989-1990, when the costs in 2019 dollars were $9,730 for a public four-year college and $25,900 for a private one, the College Board reports. The average tuition for a private nonprofit four-year institution at that time was $15,160, in 2019 dollars.﻿﻿ For the 2019 to 2020 school year, it's $36,880, which is an increase of 143%.﻿﻿ Ivy League schools like Harvard cost considerably more.
 
Although the financial aspects are daunting, the following tips are designed to dissuade you from skipping college because you are worried about the expense. Here are some strategies for making higher education part of your overall budget.
 
The data shows that in-state public schools—or a public school in a surrounding state that has reciprocity for reduced tuition—costs much less than an out-of-state public or private school. If you are not satisfied with the quality of the state schools where you live, consider moving to a state with a school that you prefer and establishing residency.
 
To establish residency, you will have to meet strict requirements that vary by state and sometimes even by the school, but this may be worth it for the savings. Most states require you to live in the state for at least one year to be eligible, but there could be other criteria to meet.﻿﻿
 
In California, for example, it is difficult for students who do not have a parent living in California to establish residency before their mid-20s. In addition to living in-state for 366 days immediately before requesting resident status, potential students must provide documentation demonstrating an intent to make California their permanent state of residence such as a driver's license, ownership of property, or steady employment and financial independence.﻿﻿
 
If you can wait it out and meet these criteria, then you can attend quality schools at in-state rates.
 
A money-saving strategy that does not require postponing college is to apply to schools where you have unique characteristics they seek. For example, you might have an ethnic background that a school is looking for, a compelling academic expertise, or play a sport or a musical instrument that makes you stand out. Schools that see you as a valuable addition due to an unusual skill—or have bequests that support students with your characteristics—may provide a scholarship. Also look for national-level grants, such as the Pell Grant, to see if you qualify to apply.
 
Another tactic is to work in a field where you may be paid to go to college. Some companies provide tuition reimbursement or support for advanced training. So does the military—and some of those benefits are also available to spouses and dependents of service members.﻿﻿
 
Keep in mind that housing and other living costs will vary by location. If you choose to live off-campus, your living expenses are typically much less. Geographically, an apartment in New York City will be much pricier than an apartment in the Midwest, and the college where you obtain your undergraduate degree can sometimes influence where you will end up working and living after school.
 
Therefore, consider where you want to live after graduating and the cost of living in that location. If possible, it should be a place where you would want to live, where the cost of living is affordable, and where your school will be a recognizable name that will allow you to get more mileage from your diploma. Various branches of the University of California may be considered terrific schools in the West, but may not be held in the same high regard in New York.
 
Make your after-school and summer jobs count by going after high-paying work. To find high-paying work—particularly in the summer when you may be free during business hours—seek out office jobs through temp agencies. Temp agencies do most of the job hunting work for you, and the office jobs they offer tend to pay above minimum wage, provide work experience closer to the situations you'll encounter post-college, and may give you connections that will help you land a meaningful internship or your first salaried position. Also, despite what the name implies, you can find both short and long-term jobs through temp agencies.
 
If you cannot get a high-paying job, get a job that will keep your living expenses down. If you work at a bakery, for example, any unsold goods at the end of the day may be fair game for employees since the business cannot sell day-old bread. Another possibility is to find a campus job that offers perks. If you can get a job in your school's residential life office, you may be able to get a discount on housing during the school year or the summer.
 
If you are still in high school, start working now and save all your paychecks for college. Presumably, you are still living at home, which is low cost, and you probably do not have high living expenses eating into your earnings as you will later on. Check if your high school has a program that will allow you to leave school at noon every day to go to work during your senior year. This will increase your job options—including opening up the possibility of a higher paying job—and allow you to work more hours.
 
Some college programs, such as engineering, are more intense than others, making it quite challenging to work while in school. For these programs, consider attending school part-time so you can still work part-time. Even if your program is not overly demanding, attending school part-time can help you spread out tuition costs and free up more time to work. However, part-time students may not have the option of living on campus, which can make it more difficult to be involved in the social aspects of college. Also, if you have student loans that requires you to be in school at least half time, be careful to meet these requirements so you don't trigger early repayment of your loans.
 
Another option is to take a year or two off after high school to work full time so you can save up enough money to make school affordable. If you don't want to postpone college, you could take your classes during evenings and weekends and work full-time during the week. This strategy will mean that your degree will take more than four years to complete, but it can be easier to budget, and you will gain valuable work experience as you go. 
 
With the high cost of education, some parents may not be able to make significant contributions to a child's higher education. If you are older and meet the requirements, you may qualify as an independent student as defined by the Higher Education Act, which has a different definition of "dependent" than the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Being an "independent student" under the Higher Education Act means that you could be eligible for financial aid because the financial aid formulas applied to this group do not take parental contributions into account. The requirements to qualify as an independent student are the following:
 
Although you may have to make some sacrifices to further your education, such as starting school later or staying in-state, you can still have the experience you want and attain a degree that will lead to a financially successful and stable future.
 College Board. "Average Published Charges, 2018-19 and 2019-20." Accessed June 20, 2020. College Board. "Growth in Published Charges." Accessed June 20, 2020. FinAid. "In-State Tuition and State Residency Requirements." Accessed June 20, 2020. University of California. "Residency Requirements." Accessed June 20, 2020. Military One Source. "Military Services Education Assistance Programs." Accessed June 20, 2020. FinAid. "Higher Education Act of 1965." Accessed June 20, 2020.