
Writing out paper checks is less common these days, as more people manage their finances online and opt for electronic checks instead. For instance, 55% of Americans say they prefer to pay bills online.﻿﻿ And nearly 93% of Americans are paid via direct deposit, rather than with a physical paycheck.﻿﻿
 
Setting up those types of transactions means mastering a fairly simple financial skill: voiding a check. If you don’t know how to do it, read on.
 
Voiding a check isn’t that difficult. Here’s what you have to do, step by step:
 
That’s really all there is to it. Once you’ve voided the check, it can no longer be used to make payments.
 Don’t cover up the routing or bank account number at the bottom of the check when voiding it, as those numbers are necessary for identifying your bank account to send or receive payments. 
There are several scenarios in which you might need to void a check, some of which have already been mentioned. To recap, here are the most common scenarios in which you may need to know how to void a check.
 
Keep in mind that voiding a check may also be necessary if you’re writing a check and make a mistake. For example, if you write the wrong dollar amount, then you’d have to void the check to keep the person or business you write it out to from cashing or depositing it.
 
It’s important to note that you can’t void a check once you’ve given it to the payee. At that point the only way to stop the check from being cashed or deposited is to request a stop payment from your bank, which may involve a fee.
 You can’t void a check once you’ve given it to the payee. 
Not every checking account offers checks. Chase, for example, is one of the larger banks offering checkless checking.﻿﻿ These types of accounts may appeal to unbanked and underbanked individuals, who represent 6.5% and 18.7% of American households, respectively, according to the most recent FDIC survey, which dates back to 2017.﻿﻿
 
If you have a checking account that doesn’t offer checks, you can try these options for setting up direct deposit or electronic payments.
 Consumer Action. "Paper or Digital? Winter 2018-19." Accessed March 2, 2020. National Payroll Week. "National Payroll Week 2018: Getting Paid in America Survey Results." Accessed March 2, 2020. JPMorgan Chase. "Chase Launches New Checking Account to Expand Access to Banking." Accessed March 2, 2020. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. "2017 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households." Accessed March 2, 2020. A 2019 survey may be under development.