
Dental insurance policies help many people effectively budget for the cost of maintaining a great smile. Compared with medical insurance, understanding dental insurance policies is a breeze. Most policies are straightforward and specific regarding which procedures are covered and exactly how much you have to pay out of pocket. Dental insurance is available as part of medical insurance plans or as a stand-alone policy.
 
First, here’s a breakdown of how private dental insurance works. You select a plan based on the providers (dentists) you want to be able to choose from and what you can afford to pay.
 
The monthly premiums will depend on the insurance company, your location, and the plan you choose. For many people the monthly premium will be around $50 a month. This means that you’re spending $600 on dental costs each year even if you don’t get any work done.
 
Most dental insurance policies have waiting periods ranging from six to 12 months before any standard work can be done. Waiting periods for major work are typically longer and can be up to two years. These periods are set in place by insurance companies to guarantee that they profit off a new account and to discourage people from applying for a new policy to cover impending procedures.﻿﻿
 
An insurance deductible is the minimum amount that must be paid before the insurance policy pays for anything. For example, if the deductible is $200, and the covered individual’s procedure is $179, the insurance does not kick in and the individual pays the entire amount. Co-pays, which are a set dollar amount, may also be required at the time of the procedure.
 
Once a dental deductible is met, most policies only cover a percentage of the remaining costs. The remaining balance of the bill paid by the patient is called coinsurance, which typically ranges from 20% to 80% of the total bill.
 Most dental insurance plans follow the 100-80-50 payment structure: They pay 100% for preventive care, 80% for basic procedures, and 50% for major procedures. 
Dental procedures covered by insurance policies are typically grouped into three categories of coverage: preventive, basic, and major. Most dental plans cover 100% of preventive care, such as annual or semiannual office visits for cleaning, X-rays, and sealants.﻿﻿
 
Basic procedures are treatment for gum disease, extractions, fillings, and root canals, with deductibles, co-pays, and coinsurance determining the patient’s out-of-pocket expenses. Most policies cover 80% of these procedures, with patients paying the remainder. Major procedures such as crowns, bridges, inlays, and dentures are typically only covered at 50%, with the patient paying more out-of-pocket expenses than other procedures.﻿﻿
 
Every policy differs in which procedures are categorized as preventive, basic, and major, so it is important to understand what is covered when comparing policies. Some policies classify root canals as major procedures, while others treat them as basic procedures and cover much more of the cost.
 
Most dental insurance policies do not cover any costs for cosmetic procedures, such as teeth whitening, tooth shaping, veneers, and gum contouring. Because these procedures are intended to simply improve the look of your teeth, they are not considered medically necessary and must be paid for entirely by the patient.﻿﻿ Some policies cover braces, but those usually require paying for a special rider and/or delaying braces for a lengthy waiting period.
 
While most medical insurance policies have yearly out-of-pocket maximums, the majority of dental policies cap the amount of annual coverage. Coverage maximums typically range from $1,000 to $2,000 per year. Generally speaking, the higher the monthly premium, the higher the yearly maximum.﻿﻿ Once the yearly maximum is reached, patients must pay for 100% of any remaining dental procedures. Many insurance companies offer policies that roll over a portion of the unused annual maximum to the next year.
 
Any leftover tax credit not used to pay for your family’s health insurance purchased through Healthcare.gov may be applied to pediatric dental insurance premiums if your medical insurance policy does not include dental coverage.﻿﻿ If your health insurance policy includes children’s dental coverage, you cannot use tax credits to buy an additional plan.
 Delta Dental. "What are dental insurance waiting periods?" Accessed June 29, 2020. Cigna. "Full Coverage Dental Insurance: What types of services and treatment does a full coverage dental plan cover?" Accessed June 29, 2020. Delta Dental. "What does my dental insurance cover?: What is covered: 100-80-50 coverage structure." Accessed June 29, 2020. Kois Center. "Does Insurance Cover Cosmetic Dentistry?" Accessed June 29, 2020. Delta Dental of Washington. "What is a dental insurance annual maximum?" Accessed June 29, 2020. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. "Dental Coverage in the Marketplace." Page 10. Accessed June 29, 2020.