
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
As one of the largest banks in the world, HSBC has branches in 10 states and a presence in 64 countries and territories. The bank offers a myriad of banking and loan products. Rates for its personal loans are as low as 6.99% (existing customers start at 5.99%), with loan amounts starting at $3,000. Different types of HSBC customers may be able to borrow more than the $30,000 maximum granted to new customers. 
 
Take a look at our review of HSBC’s personal loans to determine whether it’s right for you. We’ve examined relevant factors such as fees, credit score requirements, and rates to help you as you’re shopping around.
 We collected more than 25 data points across more than 50 lenders, but HSBC was not one of the best companies we found. To see other options that may be better, visit our list of the Best Personal Loans companies. Prequalification available Fast turnaround time for loan disbursement Competitive rates No co-signers allowed Not available in all states Low maximum loan amount for new customers 
You can use your personal loan proceeds for almost any purpose, including home improvement projects, vacation expenses, car repairs, relocation expenses, and debt consolidation. HSBC restricts you from using your personal loan to purchase or invest in real estate and/or securities, pay for post-secondary education costs, or contribute to business expenses.
 
Approved loans for new customers may be available as soon as the next business day. Existing customers can opt to receive an official check or have funds deposited into their HSBC account immediately upon approval.
 
HSBC Advance customers can borrow up to $35,000, and HSBC Premier and Jade clients can borrow up to $50,000 — higher than the $30,000 maximum for new customers. In addition, the starting interest rate for existing customers is 1% lower. 
 
You can check what rates you may qualify for online through a soft credit inquiry — it won’t affect your credit score. Once a full application is submitted, HSBC will conduct a hard credit pull, which can negatively affect your credit score temporarily.
