
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The HSBC Premier World Elite Mastercard offers those who already have a high-worth relationship with the bank rewards of 3 points per dollar on travel purchases, and 2 points per dollar on dining purchases. Along with a significant range of travel benefits, there's a one-time offer worth $750 when redeemed for airfare. But the card carries a hefty annual fee of $395.
 50,000 bonus points, worth at least $750 in air travel, after spending $4,000 in the first 3 months from account opening. The HSBC Premier World Elite Mastercard credit card is not one of our top-rated travel credit cards. You can review our list of the best travel credit cards for what we think are better options. Competitive bonus offer $100 annual airline credit and other travel benefits Cell-phone protection Requires a qualifying HSBC Premier account 
The HSBC Premier World Elite Mastercard is for those who already have a relationship, involving considerable funds, with HSBC and are willing to pay a high annual fee to earn rewards on their credit-card spending and enjoy a number of travel benefits.  
 
This is indeed a card for high-worth HSBC customers. To qualify for the required Premier status, you must either maintain an account balance of at least $75,000, make hefty direct deposits to it every month, or hold a mortgage. Then after qualifying, you must pay a steep annual fee of $395 for the card.
 
That fee will be justified for those who fly at least once a year and use ride-sharing services at least five times a year. That’s thanks to the card’s $100 annual statement credits for each of an airline purchase and up to five Uber or Lyft rides of at least $20 each.
 
The card has appeal, too, if you have no insurance on your cell phone, since it extends $600 in complimentary coverage provided you pay your cell-phone bill with the card. While there are caveats to the protection, including that it covers a total loss only when the phone is stolen, it still offers peace of mind about the most valuable item most of us carry around with us. 
 
New cardholders can earn a one-time offer of 50,000 points after spending at least $4,000 on eligible purchases within the first three months after opening an account. 
 
That’s a higher spending requirement than with the many offers that require $3,000 as the minimum “spend” for comparable rewards. The offer is worth $750 when redeemed to purchase airline travel through HSBC’s rewards portal. The bonus points post four to six weeks after the promotional period has ended.
 
Cardholders earn 3 points per dollar on travel purchases and 2 points per dollar on dining purchases. All other purchases on the card earn 1 point per dollar spent. There's no limit to the number of points you can earn in a year and points don't expire as long as your account is active.
 
HSBC has a fairly broad definition of travel purchases. It includes airlines, hotels, motels, travel agencies, tour operators, cruise lines, bus lines, automotive and vehicle rentals, truck rentals, boat rentals, motor homes and recreational vehicles, campground and trailer parks, automobile parking lots and garages, bridge and road fees/tolls, trains, railroads, ferries, and limousines and taxi cabs.
 
HSBC’s definition of dining is broad as well. It includes restaurants, cafes, bars, lounges, and fast food outlets. 
 
Points are credited to your HSBC account within one to two billing cycles after the purchase is made.
 
Points can be redeemed through the Premier program in several ways: 
 
All redemptions must be made through the HSBC rewards portal. Points redeemed for airfare, are worth 1.5 cents per point. Cash back and gift card redemption rates will vary.
 
HSBC’s Rewards for Miles program allows Premier cardholders to transfer points to the frequent flyer/reward programs of several airlines including Asia Airlines, Singapore Airlines and British Airways at varying transfer ratios, depending on the airline.The program’s Terms and Conditions say the transfer rate is two points for every mile-- meaning you receive only half as many miles in the airlines’ program as you forgo in HSBC points. That said, in (confusing) consecutive messages during an online chat, an HSBC rep said the rate “was one point per mile” and “varies by the airline.” If this program is important to you, call the Premier Rewards Department at 888.662.HSBC (4722) to confirm rates for the airlines to which you are loyal or may want to fly.Points earned on this card cannot be transferred to other individual’s accounts. 
 
Getting the most out of this card begins with meeting the $4,000 spending requirement within the first three months after opening an account. That spending will allow you to earn the card’s 50,000-point bonus.
 
After that, use this card to pay for all of your travel and dining purchases, which earn 3 points per dollar and 2 points per dollar, respectively. Keep in mind that using this card for other purchases isn't as beneficial, since those expenses only earn 1 point per dollar.
 
You'll get even more value out of this card by taking advantage of its features. Look to find occasions where you can use the $100 travel statement credit, $100 credit towards Uber and Lyft rides, and the fee credit against Global Entry or TSAPrecheck.
 
Here are two scenarios to demonstrate how many points you might be able to make with the HSBC Premier World Elite Mastercard.
 
Let's say you travel twice per year. We'll assume that each way you purchase a domestic round-trip ticket that costs $350, which is around the average price of a domestic flight, according to the Bureau of Transportation. Those tickets would together cost $700, and would earn 2,100 points (with the 3 points per dollar rate for travel purchases). Let's further assume that, on both trips, you stay a total of five nights in a hotel that costs $150 per night. With a total of $750, you’d earn 2,250 points (given the 3 points-per-dollar travel rate). In addition, you charge $200 per month in dining purchases on this card; that $2,400 in annual spending earns 2 points per dollar spent, for a total of 4,800 points.
 
Overall, you'd earn 9,150 points on this card—2,100 points from the airfare, 2,250 points from the hotel stays, and 4,800 points on the dining bills. Those points are worth $137 when redeemed for airfare through HSBC.  
 
This scenario is further geared towards the high-worth households that are likely to carry this card. Let's say you and three family members purchase four round-trip domestic economy-class tickets, again at $350 apiece, and share a $200-per-night hotel suite for five nights. That spending—$1,400 on flights and $1,000 on hotels—will earn 7,200 points at the 3 points per dollar travel rewards rate. You spend an additional $2,000 on car rentals and taxis throughout the year, which also earn 3 points per dollar—for an additional 6,000 points. Total points for travel: 13,200 points. Finally, let's say that you and the family spend $300 per month for the family on dining. At the 2-points-per-dollar rate for dining, that $3,600 in spending would earn 7,200 points. 
 
Overall, you would spend $8,000 and earn 20,400 points. We value those rewards at around $306 when redeemed for airfare.  
