
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
A multinational bank with Hong Kong origins and headquarters in London, HSBC Bank has had a presence in the United States since 1865. This banking giant has branches in 10 states, plus the District of Columbia, not to mention mobile banking options. In addition, HSBC Direct is the bank’s online-only institution, which offers branch-free banking direct to customers.
 Minimum deposit of $1 for checking or savings account Easily waived monthly checking account fee Minimum balance of $1 to earn annual percentage yield (APY) No minimum balance requirement or monthly fee for Everyday Savings Account and HSBC Direct Savings Bonuses available for new customers and referrals International banking options Present in only 10 states and the District of Columbia with fewer than 250 branches Low APYs on interest-bearing checking accounts Overdraft protection possibly more than insufficient funds fees HSBC and HSBC Direct unconnected online The number of ATMs isn't available online 
HSBC Bank is well suited to customers with robust savings accounts and those who may have international banking needs. In particular, you’ll find HSBC works great for you if you:
 
HSBC Bank customers have access to a full suite of deposit accounts and services, which include:
 
HSBC Everyday Savings is a basic account that can help make it easy to get into the savings habit. With no minimum balance requirement or monthly maintenance fees, customers don’t have to worry about losing ground with their savings because of fees. In addition, the ability to earn APY on balances as low as $1 means that you can also expect some (very modest) growth with this account, even if you have a low balance. That said, the APY of 0.01% is very low and does not necessarily compare with other no-minimum-balance savings accounts, especially those offered by online banks.﻿﻿
 
HSBC Advance Savings may be a better option for banking customers with a little more to put aside in savings. This account, which you can only open if you also have an HSBC Advance Checking account, does have a monthly $25 maintenance fee. This can be waived if you do at least one of the following:﻿﻿
 
This account has a tiered APY. You will earn 0.01% on balances less than $15,000, and 0.05% on balances greater than $15,000.﻿﻿
 The fact that HSBC identifies four APY tiers for the Advance Savings account suggests that the upper tiers will increase their rates once rates increase overall. 
HSBC Premier Savings has more to offer savers with deep pockets. Similar to the Advance Savings account, you will have to open an HSBC Premier Checking account to qualify for it. In addition, there is a $50 per month maintenance fee unless you meet one of the following requirements:﻿﻿
 
This account also offers a tiered APY.﻿﻿
 Please note that you receive a lower APY in the HSBC Premier Savings account for balances between $15,000 and $24,999.99 than you would for the same balance in an HSBC Advance Savings account. If you are deciding between these two savings accounts, take this APY gap into consideration. 
HSBC Direct Savings is an online-only savings account offering a higher APY than any of HSBC’s other savings accounts. The 0.50% APY is available at any balance you keep within the account. With a $1 minimum deposit to open, no monthly maintenance fee, and no excess withdrawal fee, this is a very inexpensive account to open, in addition to offering a high APY.﻿﻿
 
As HSBC Direct Savings is online only, it comes with all of the benefits and drawbacks of a branch-free account. To start, you must handle all of your banking transactions via automated telephone banking and/or Personal Internet Banking. This account allows you to deposit money remotely using the mobile check deposit on the banking app and online transfers. Online transfers between HSBC checking and savings accounts will post immediately via the bank’s Quick Transfer function. However, transfers into or out of HSBC Direct Savings involving another bank will take more time—generally one to two business days.
 
HSBC Basic Banking offers customers a no-frills banking service that allows them to take care of all the things they’d need a checking account to do. Basic Banking comes with a no-fee HSBC Debit Mastercard, Personal Internet Banking, online Bill Pay, eStatements, and access to the mobile app.
 
This account does charge a $1 monthly maintenance fee that cannot be waived. However, there are no minimum balance and direct deposit requirements. The account limits your checks and withdrawal slips to eight per month in aggregate. Once you have passed that limit, you will pay $0.35 for each additional check or withdrawal slip, but this fee does not apply to ATM withdrawals and transactions using the Bill Pay service.
 
Having a Basic Banking account means you are eligible for optional overdraft protection through HSBC Select Credit. This personal line of credit lets you borrow money as necessary, up to your available credit limit, and it can also be used as overdraft protection.﻿﻿ 
 Overdrafts covered by Select Credit will be charged up to a 15.99% APR, and you will also have to pay a transaction fee equal to the amount transferred to cover the overdraft, up to a $10 maximum per day. Taking these costs into account, the $35 insufficient fund fee for overdrafts may be the cheaper option.﻿﻿ 
HSBC Choice Checking comes with a $15 per month maintenance fee, but you can easily waive this fee by either keeping a $1,500 minimum combined balance in all of your HSBC deposit and investment accounts or having a recurring monthly direct deposit of any amount.
 
As with the Basic Banking account, HSBC Choice Checking provides customers with a no-fee debit card, access to internet banking, online bill pay, eStatements, and the mobile app.﻿﻿
 
Account holders are eligible to earn up to $2,000 in annual referral bonuses if they successfully refer a new customer who opens a qualifying account.﻿﻿
 
ATM transactions are free at most HSBC ATMs worldwide, but this is a lackluster promise at best. Not only is it unclear how many HSBC ATMs are available within the United States; the website itself states that customers may be charged additional fees by the ATM operator, including a fee by another HSBC entity operating ATMs outside the U.S. The out-of-network ATM fee is $2.50 if you are forced to use a non-HSBC ATM.﻿﻿
 
HSBC Advance Checking account is the interest-bearing checking account that the bank has set up as an eligibility requirement for opening an HSBC Advance Savings account. The account charges a $25 monthly maintenance fee unless you maintain a $5,000 minimum balance in all of your HSBC accounts, have a monthly recurring direct deposit, or carry an HSBC U.S. residential mortgage loan.
 
In addition to the same debit card, online and mobile banking, and optional overdraft protection (via Select Credit) available through Choice Checking, Advance Checking account holders enjoy the following benefits:
 
HSBC Premier Savings requires you to have the above interest-bearing checking account in order to open an account. Expect to pay a $50 monthly maintenance fee unless you either maintain a $75,000 minimum balance in all of your HSBC accounts, have monthly recurring direct deposits totaling $5,000, or carry an HSBC U.S. residential mortgage loan with an original loan amount of at least $500,000.
 
There are some pretty impressive benefits available to Premier Checking customers, including paying no foreign transaction fees when you make purchases with your HSBC Premier Debit World Mastercard and access to priority services and emergency financial support at any HSBC branch in the world.
 
The downside of this checking account is its currently low interest rate. As with Advance Checking, you will only earn 0.01% APY on your balances above $5. The higher requirements for this account do not translate into a higher APY, at least not at the moment. The APY may increase when the Federal Reserve raises rates again.﻿﻿
 
HSBC Direct Checking is an online-only checking account that gives customers the best of both worlds as it is an affordable interest-bearing checking account.has no monthly maintenance fee whatsoever, plus an APY of 0.01% on all balances above $1. This account also comes with the HSBC Debit Mastercard.
 
Like Direct Savings, this account is online only, which means you have to handle all of your transactions via automated telephone banking, Personal Online Banking, ATMs, and/or the mobile app. The account comes with no checks whatsoever, so it will not work for any customers who may need to write checks on occasion.﻿﻿
 
HSBC offers customers three CDs with terms ranging from six months to 24 months. According to both the HSBC and the HSBC Direct site, these rates are only available if you open the new account online.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
HSBC offers six credit cards, all under the Mastercard umbrella, with varying perks and benefits.﻿﻿
 
In addition to the above products and services, HSBC also offers the following:
 
The customer service phone line is reachable from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. EST, seven days a week, at 1-800-975-4722. In addition, you can interact with live chat on both the HSBC and the HSBC Direct websites 24/7. Surprisingly, the bank also invites customers to tweet questions or concerns to the customer care Twitter account from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. EST Monday through Friday, and 8 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. EST on Saturday.﻿﻿
 
HSBC’s mobile app, 2.3 stars on Google Play and 3.5 stars on iTunes, offers some forward-thinking security features, such as fingerprint ID on Android and facial recognition on iOS, in particular. Having a mobile app is even more important for this bank, considering the small number of HSBC branches in America.﻿﻿
 
HSBC makes it very easy to open accounts online, even if you do not reside in one of the 10 states served by its 246 bank branches. Once you have opened an account, both the online banking portal and mobile app make it easy to handle all your transactions, even if you can’t make it to a brick-and-mortar branch. However, you may find it’s a little difficult to find fee-free ATMs, so you may need to do some reconnaissance to access your cash if you do not live near an HSBC branch.
 As a multinational bank, HSBC has a great deal to recommend it for the right customer. International travelers, those who maintain large bank balances, and those looking for a bank to handle their mortgage as well as their regular banking needs would all be well served by HSBC’s offerings. The wide array of products and services mean there is something for almost everyone, but it is clear that most of its products are geared toward wealthier clients. The focus on higher-income clients is part of what may make this bank a bad fit for a lot of average customers. If you do not live in the 10-state geographical footprint, the more-basic accounts might be somewhat onerous to use. Several of these accounts limit or restrict check usage, meaning you will have to go into a branch for a cashier’s check. And that’s not to mention the low number of ATMs, making it expensive to access your own money with one of the basic accounts in a state that is not served by HSBC. However, if you have little need for cash, no need for checks, or can afford one of the more deluxe accounts, these issues probably will not bother you. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 US.HSBC.com. "A first step to building your financial future: HSBC Everyday Savings." Accessed April 23, 2020. US. HSBC.com. "Competitive savings rates for the financial self-starters: HSBC Advance Savings." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "Banking Deposit Rates." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "Exclusive, high-yield savings account rates for Premier clients: HSBC Premier Savings." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "HSBC Direct Savings: Reach your goals faster with an online savings account." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "HSBC Basic Banking: Ideal when you write only a few checks a month." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "HSBC Select Credit: Summary of Terms: Important Information." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "HSBC Choice Checking: Simple everyday banking with personalized support." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "Score up to $2,000 for sharing a good thing." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "Turn everyday banking into a rewarding relationship: HSBC Advance Checking." Accessed April 23, 2020. US.HSBC.com. "HSBC Premier Checking: Make the most of life, no matter where you are or where you’re going." Accessed April 23, 2020.