
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Founded in 1866, and still headquartered in Columbus, Ohio, Huntington is a regional bank serving seven states in parts of the Midwest and South. A full-service bank, it offers consumers a one-stop shopping for banking needs. Read our in-depth review to determine if Huntington's products and services are right for you.
 Basic checking account is fee free All day deposit 24-hour grace period on overdrafts Robust customer support Only available in seven states Low APY High minimum balances on interest-bearing checking accounts High overdraft fees For accounts or products that have area-specific interest rates, customers who live outside of the seven-state region will receive the rate associated with Columbus, Ohio, where Huntington is headquartered. 
Huntington will appeal to customers looking for basic checking and savings accounts. It will be especially tempting to those who:
 
Huntington offers a robust menu of products and services including:
 
Huntington Premier Savings
 
This is the basic savings account for Huntington customers. Premier Savings is free of fees for customers who have a linked Asterisk-Free Checking account, or who maintain an average daily balance of $300 or more. Otherwise, the monthly maintenance fee is $4. You can open an account with a minimum deposit of $50.﻿﻿
 
Premier Savings offers savers an APY of 0.02% and only requires a balance of $0.01 to earn. Deposit-to-deposit overdraft protection is provided if you have a linked checking account. If you overdraw, Huntington will automatically transfer money in increments of $100 to cover the overdraft from your Premier Savings account. There is no fee for this protection, but be aware of potential transfer limits.﻿﻿
 
Huntington Relationship Savings
 
This account gives savers an improved APY that gets even better if you have additional linked accounts. The basic rate is 0.02% and goes up based on which type of accounts you also have with Huntington:﻿﻿
 
With the improved rate comes bigger costs, however. Relationship Savings is free for customers who maintain an average daily balance of $2,500 or link the account to either a Huntington 5 or Huntington 25 checking account. Both have a minimum daily balance requirement and a fee if that balance is not met. Otherwise, savers with a Relationship Savings account will pay a $10 monthly maintenance fee.﻿﻿
 
Like the Premier Savings account, Relationship Savings offers deposit-to-deposit overdraft protection, provided you link to a Huntington 5 Checking account.
 
Asterisk-Free Checking
 
Huntington tries very hard to make sure this basic checking account lives up to the "Asterisk-Free" name. There is no monthly maintenance fee, no minimum deposit to open the account, and no minimum balance required. And contrary to common banking policies in the 21st Century, Huntington does not charge fees for providing paper statements rather than email statements, if that's your preference.﻿﻿
 
Additionally, the all-day deposit policy, which treats any deposit made before midnight on a business day as getting in on the same business day, is a remarkably forgiving rule that helps customers stay in the black. Pair that with the 24-hour grace policy for overdrafts, which gives customers until midnight the day after an overdraft to make a deposit or transfer to cover the overdraft, as well as the free deposit-to-deposit overdraft protection with a Premier Savings account.﻿﻿
 If you overdraw funds, the higher-than-average overdraft fee of $37.50 can be levied up to four times per day. 
Huntington 5 Checking
 
This is Huntington's lower-level interest-bearing checking account. Customers can earn 0.04% APY on their account balance. There is no minimum required to earn or no minimum deposit to open this account. If you maintain $5,000 in total relationship balances, there is no fee. Otherwise, you will pay $5 per month.﻿﻿
 
Huntington 5 Checking offers the same forgiving policies as Asterisk-Free checking: all day deposit, a 24-hour grace period, and overdraft protection. You need to link this account to a Relationship Savings account to receive the overdraft protection. In addition, account holders are also eligible for 1.05% cash back with a linked Voice Credit Card with Rewards, as well as five out-of-network ATM fee waivers per month.﻿﻿
 
Huntington 25 Checking
 
For customers looking for higher rates from an interest-bearing checking account, the bank offers Huntington 25 Checking. Account holders earn 0.06% APY on any size balance. However, expect to pay $25 per month in maintenance fees unless you are able to maintain $25,000 in total relationship balances among your accounts.﻿﻿
 
Like the other checking accounts, Huntington 25 provides all-day deposit, a 24-hour grace period, and overdraft protection (with a Relationship Savings account).
 
Huntington 25 also comes with some other major perks:﻿﻿
 
Huntington Relationship Money Market Account
 
Like the Relationship Savings account, Huntington's money market account offers better rates if you have additional accounts. Provided you have a minimum of $25,000 in your Relationship Money Market account, you can earn between 0.21% and 0.29% APY depending on what other accounts you have at Huntington. Balances below $25,000 don't earn interest.﻿﻿
 
The Relationship Money Market account also comes with a $25 monthly fee, which is waived for customers who either maintain a $25,000 minimum balance or who have a linked Huntington 5 or Huntington 25 checking account.﻿﻿
 
Like Huntington's traditional checking accounts, the Relationship Money Market account also provides all-day deposit, a 24-hour grace period, and overdraft protection.
 
Huntington offers standard CDs with terms ranging from one to 72 months. CDs require a minimum deposit of $1,000 and rates range from 0.01% to 0.25% APY.﻿﻿
 
Jumbo CDs are also available, with a minimum deposit of $100,000. The terms range from seven to 1,825 days (approximately 60 months) and the rates from 0.01% to 0.25%.﻿﻿
 
The fact that Huntington describes its jumbo CD terms in days, rather than months, makes it difficult to compare jumbo rates with standard rates. Converting the terms from days to months helps to clarify that jumbo rates seem to be approximately the same for similar term lengths.
 
Huntington has a single credit card, the Voice Credit Card, offered through Mastercard. Customers can choose to receive cashback rewards or a lower annual percentage rate (APR).﻿﻿
 
In addition to the above products and services, Huntington also offers the following:
 
Customers have a number of avenues available to reach customer support, starting with live agents available daily by phone (800-480-2265) from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. (EST). The website also boasts automated customer support systems, as well as an easy-to-use search tool, and a comprehensive FAQ page. You can also reach out to Huntington via Twitter or Facebook any time.
 
You can open an account online or in a branch. Though Huntington is only present in seven states, the bank appears to be friendly to customers outside of this region.
 
The Huntington mobile app allows customers to handle transactions (including mobile check deposit) on the go. The app has a 4.8/5 rating on Apple and 4.0/5 on Google.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 Customers looking for solid options for basic checking and savings accounts would be well served by Huntington. Its truly free checking account, forgiving policies that keep minor mistakes from blowing up, and easy methods to avoid fees with the basic savings account make it attractive to many customers' needs. Add in the fact that Huntington also offers a wide array of other products and services, and it's clear that this is a good one-stop-shop for banking customers. For those with higher balances, Huntington is not necessarily as good a choice. The rates available on all the interest-bearing accounts are not as high as can be found at other institutions, particularly online-only banks. Additionally, Huntington is only present in seven states which limits the bank's reach, especially for customers who want basic banking options and like to able to walk into a branch. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Huntington “Compare Checking Accounts Chart: Types of Checking Accounts.” Accessed July 29, 2020. Huntington. “24-Hour Grace Overdraft Fee Relief: No Overdraft Fee.” Accessed July 29, 2020.   Huntington. “Savings and Money Market Accounts.” Accessed July 29, 2020. Huntington. “Premier Savings Account.” Accessed July 29, 2020.