
Indexed universal life (IUL) insurance policies put a portion of the policyholder’s premium payments toward annual renewable term insurance with the remainder added to the cash value of the policy after fees are deducted. On a monthly or annual basis, the cash value is credited with interest based on increases in an equity index. The gains are applied based on a participation rate that’s set by the insurance company, which can be anywhere from 25% to more than 100%.
 
Indexed universal life insurance is often pitched as a cash value insurance policy that benefits from the market’s gains–tax-free–without the risk of loss during a market downturn.
 
The typical marketing material for an IUL policy can also be instructive. For example, according to Voya Financial:
 
By comparison, Equitable puts it this way:
 
But while the sales pitch certainly sounds compelling on the surface, critics warn that market returns are far from guaranteed and the term nature of the insurance could make it expensive to maintain the policy later in life when premiums tend to rise sharply.
 These policies are generally best for those with a large upfront investment who are planning for tax-free retirement. 
As is the case with any type of universal life insurance, it's vital to thoroughly research any potential firms to ensure they're among the best universal life insurance companies currently operating.
 
These policies leverage call options to gain upside exposure to equity indexes without the risk of losses, while whole life policies provide only a small interest rate that may not even be guaranteed.
 
Policyholders can decide how much risk they’d like to take in the market, adjust death benefit amounts as needed, and choose among a number of riders that make the policy customizable to their needs.
 
Policyholders do not pay capital gains on the increase in cash value over time unless they abandon the policy before it matures, whereas other types of financial accounts may tax capital gains upon withdrawal.﻿﻿
 
There are several gotchas associated with indexed universal life insurance policies that critics are quick to point out. For instance, someone who establishes the policy over a time when the market is performing poorly could end up with high premium payments that don’t contribute at all to the cash value. The policy could then potentially lapse if the premium payments aren’t made on time later in life, which could negate the point of life insurance altogether.
 
Insurance companies often set maximum participation rates of less than 100% and as low as 25% in some cases. In addition, returns on equity indexes are often capped at certain amounts during good years.
 
Whole life policies often include a guaranteed interest rate with predictable premium amounts throughout the life of the policy. IUL policies, on the other hand, have variable returns based on an index and have variable premiums over time.
 Voya Financial. "What Are the Types of Life Insurance?" Accessed April 10, 2020. Equitable. "Indexed Universal Life Insurance." Accessed April 10, 2020. Missouri Department of Insurance. "Life Insurance FAQs." Accessed April 10.