
The primary benefits of contributing to an IRA are the tax deductions, the tax-deferred or tax-free growth on earnings, and if you are eligible, the nonrefundable tax credits. To get the most out of contributing to your IRA, it’s important to understand what these benefits mean and the limitations placed on them.
 
If you do not participate in an employer-sponsored plan, such as a 401(k), a SEP IRA, a SIMPLE IRA, or another qualified plan, contributions to your traditional IRA may be tax-deductible.﻿﻿
 
However, if you participate in any of these plans, you may be considered an active participant, and the deductibility of your contributions would be determined by your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) and your tax-filing status—that is, whether you file “married filing separately,” “married filing jointly,” or “single.”﻿﻿
 
If your traditional IRA contribution is not deductible, you may still make a nondeductible IRA contribution to it. Alternatively, you may contribute to a Roth IRA, provided your MAGI satisfies the Roth IRA eligibility limits for the 2020 tax year, which are as follows:﻿﻿
 
If your income falls between the ranges that allow only a partial contribution, you may use a special formula to determine that partial contribution. This IRA calculator will further help you determine if you’re eligible for an IRA.
 If you are married but lived apart from your spouse for the entire year, you must file in the “single” category. 
Should you decide to make a nondeductible contribution to your traditional IRA, be sure to file IRS Form 8606, which helps you and the IRS keeps track of the nontaxable balance in your traditional IRAs, ensuring that you do not pay taxes on distributions that should be tax-free.﻿﻿
 
Splitting your contribution between your traditional and Roth IRA may be beneficial in certain circumstances:
 
Your combined contributions to your Roth and traditional IRAs should not exceed the IRA contribution limit, which for tax years 2019 and 2020 is $6,000 for people who are under 50. For those who are 50 or older, a catch-up contribution of $1,000 is allowed.﻿﻿
 Make sure to find out if you are eligible for the IRS’s Saver’s Credit, which can amount to up to 50% of your IRA contribution but is topped off at $1,000.﻿﻿ 
You may be eligible for a nonrefundable tax credit of up to 50% of your IRA contribution, not exceeding $1,000, depending on your adjusted gross income and tax-filing status. Below are the 2020 tax credits that are allowed for combinations of particular income ranges and tax-filing statuses:﻿﻿
 
This nonrefundable tax credit is allowed in addition to any deduction you may receive for your IRA contribution.﻿﻿
 
In order to claim the nonrefundable tax credit, you must file IRS Form 8880, the most current version of which is available on the IRS website.
 
As the earnings in your traditional IRA grow on a tax-deferred basis—and on a tax-free basis in your Roth IRA—you have plenty of reasons to contribute to an IRA, along with the benefits discussed above. However, you may want to consult with your financial advisor to determine whether your savings should be directed to other vehicles.
 
For instance, if you receive a matching contribution in a 401(k) plan, it generally makes better financial sense to contribute the amount necessary to receive the maximum match—and then only contribute to an IRA if you can still afford to do so.
 Internal Revenue Service. "IRA Deduction Limits." Accessed May 23, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Amount of Roth IRA Contributions That You Can Make for 2020." Accessed May 23, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "About Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs." Accessed May 23, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Plans FAQs on Designated Roth Accounts." Accessed May 23, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - IRA Contribution Limits." Accessed May 23, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Savings Contributions Credit (Saver’s Credit)." Accessed May 23, 2020.