
IRS Publication 517—Social Security, and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers—delineates and updates the Social Security and income tax rules each year for members of the clergy and other religious workers.﻿﻿
 
IRS Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers, is a document published each year by the Internal Revenue Service detailing the ways clergy members and other religious workers are required to file their Social Security and Medicare taxes.﻿﻿
 
These two types of taxes are collected through either the Self-Employment Contributions Act (SECA) system or the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) system. IRS Publication 517 helps to determine which forms of income are subject to SECA, and which are subject to FICA rules.﻿﻿
 
As of 2017, under SECA, the self-employed individual qualifying for this category is responsible for paying all of their own taxes. Under FICA, the employer and the employee are each responsible for half of the Social Security and the Medicare systems.﻿﻿ All clergy or religious workers will be subject to one of these systems, but not both.﻿﻿
 
In addition, as of 2020, wages and self-employment income for clergy and religious workers are also usually subject to a Medicare tax, which is determined with the use of Form 8959.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 As with many IRS documents, various stipulations change from year to year, so it is imperative that all those affected by the section of the tax code refer to the latest version. 
Ministerial services, in general, are the services performed in the exercise of a ministry, in duties required by a religious order, or in the exercise of a professional Christian Science practitioner or reader.
 
IRS Publication 517 affects several ministerial categories. Ministerial services, in general, are the services performed in the exercise of a ministry, the duties required by a religious order, or the duties of a professional Christian Science practitioner or reader:﻿﻿
 Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 517: Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers," Pages 2-3. Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 517: Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers," Page 7. Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 517: Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers," Page 2. Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "About Form 8959, Additional Medicare Tax." Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "About Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers." Accessed Feb. 17, 2020.