
Banks offer perks to entice wealthy individuals to do business with them. Because the wealthy account holders add more to a bank's assets under management (AUM) than non-wealthy ones, banks have a strong incentive to create rewards programs.
 
Chase, Citigroup Inc. and Bank of America Corp. have niche programs that provide a host of rewards to account holders with balances above a minimum threshold. CitiGold, though powerful, does have some interesting competition.
 
Citigold provides the following perks and rewards for customers with more than $200,000 in their checking, savings, retirement, and investment accounts with Citigroup.﻿﻿
 
Citigold customers enjoy no monthly service fees on their checking accounts as long as they maintain minimum balances across their deposit, retirement, and investment accounts.﻿﻿
 
Citigold customers earn rewards points, known as ThankYou Points, for direct deposits or enrollment in online bill pay from a Citigold account. Customers can redeem these points for travel discounts, gift cards, and even cash.﻿﻿
 
Overdraft protection transfer fees, checkbook order fees, stop payment fees, incoming wire transfer fees, out-of-network ATM fees, and money order fees are not charged to Citigold customers.﻿﻿ You are also allowed to make trades with Citi Personal Wealth Management for a reduced fee.﻿﻿
 
Mortgage customers enrolled in Citigold can choose between reduced closing costs or a 0.25% interest rate reduction. Citigold customers can apply for a home equity line of credit (HELOCs) or a personal loan at reduced rates based on the prime rate. Numerous restrictions apply, with good credit being the most important.﻿﻿ 
 
While Chase reserves its ultimate services for those account holders with over $10 million in assets, individuals with $250,000 in assets can take advantage of the services offered through Chase Private Client.﻿﻿
 
These high net worth individuals (HNWIs) do not pay regular banking fees, such as wire transfer fees or fees usually charged for using ATMs abroad. They have access to additional debit cards with set limits for their family and caregivers.﻿﻿
 
HNWIs can enjoy the perks associated with specialty credit cards at Chase, including the Chase Sapphire Reserve. Considered one of the premier cards for traveling, the Sapphire Reserve gives $300 in credits for travel expenses every year and three times the rewards points for international travel. It waives foreign transaction fees, charges by other credit cards when used abroad, and provides access to VIP travel lounges in airports worldwide.﻿﻿
 
Bank of America's Preferred Rewards Gold program is available for customers with total balances above $20,000 between their Bank of America banking account and Merrill Lynch investment accounts. Customers with balances above $50,000 or $100,000 can join the Preferred Rewards Platinum or Platinum Honors programs, respectively.﻿﻿
 
Rewards customers receive a percentage increase in money market account yield for gold, platinum, and platinum honors status, respectively. However, this does not mean platinum honors account holder earns 20% interest on his money market account. Rather, it means if the account is paying 1%, he earns 1.2%.﻿﻿
 
Members receive a 25, 50 or 75% boost in credit card rewards, based on their tiers.﻿﻿
 
Platinum members can make up to 12 yearly withdrawals from out-of-network ATMs for no fee, while platinum honors members receive unlimited no-fee withdrawals.﻿﻿
 
Mortgage origination fees are reduced by $200, $400, or $600, depending on the member's tier. The interest rate discount on auto loans is 0.25 to 0.5%. Credit approval is still required for all loans.﻿﻿
 
Since 2014, Preferred Rewards members have enjoyed free stock and exchange traded fund (ETF) trades through Merrill Edge.﻿﻿ In 2019, zero-dollar trades were expanded to all Merrill Edge self-directed clients.﻿﻿
 Citigroup. "Citigold: Wealth Management on Your Terms." Accessed May 22, 2020 Citigroup. "Rewards and Offers." Accessed May 22, 2020. Citigroup. "Go Further with Preferred Banking Benefits." Accessed May 22, 2020. Citigroup. "Citi Personal Wealth Management Commission Schedule." Accessed May 22, 2020. Citigroup. "Compare Benefits: Options to Fit Your Needs." Accessed May 22, 2020. Chase. "Private Client." Accessed May 22, 2020. Chase. "Banking with Chase Private Client." Accessed May 22, 2020. Chase. "Credit Cards and Lending with Chase Private Client." Accessed May 22, 2020. Bank of America. "Preferred Rewards Program Details." Accessed May 22, 2020. Bank of America. "Bank of America Extends Commission-Free Trades to All Preferred Rewards Members." Accessed May 22, 2020. Bank of America. "Bank of America Expands Unlimited Zero-Dollar Trades to All Merrill Edge Self-Directed Clients." Accessed May 22, 2020.