
Generally, homeowners insurance is not tax-deductible, nor are premiums, even though your premiums may be included in your mortgage payments. Why? Because homeowners insurance is not considered nondeductible expenses by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).﻿﻿
 
What does this mean for homeowners? It means you, unfortunately, cannot itemize any payments for home insurance—including fire, theft, and comprehensive coverage—nor title insurance on your tax return.﻿﻿
 
A homeowners insurance policy offers protection against potential damages to one's home. In addition, it typically covers a homeowner's driveway, fence, garden shed, and garage.
 
It is worth noting if you run a very small business on your property—like lawn care or gardening business, your homeowners insurance might cover up to a couple of thousand dollars for it. If you do run a business on your property it is recommended you ask your homeowners insurance company upfront if it is covered or not.
 
If you run a larger business out of your home, it likely will not be covered, and you would need to take out an insurance policy specifically for the business.
 
For example, if you run something like a daycare in your house, for instance, your homeowners insurance policy would most likely require you to take out a commercial policy for your business.
 
There are, however, two special instances in which you can likely deduct insurance payments from your home.
 The itemized deduction for mortgage insurance premiums is available through 2020.﻿﻿ 
Homeowners insurance is a necessity to make sure your home, property, and possessions are protected against fire, weather, theft, or liability. In fact, if you're taking out a mortgage, many lenders require you to have a policy. So, if even if it doesn't carry a tax break with it, homeowners insurance is worth the cost.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 530: Tax Information for Homeowners." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 587: Business Use of Your Home." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 515 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Losses." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Home Office Deduction." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 527: Residential Rental Property." Accessed May 1, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 530: Tax Information for Homeowners." Accessed May 1, 2020.