
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Though best known for its medical student-oriented loans and refinancing programs, Laurel Road (a subsidiary of Key Bank) also offers personal loans to the general public. It should be noted that the 7.50% minimum APR is not only higher than normal, but the max APR is more in-line with a lot of credit cards or financing products for people with poor credit scores at 24.75%. You can use a Laurel Road personal loan for debt consolidation, home improvement, or paying off a considerable expense.
 
Our Laurel Road personal loan review breaks down what you need to know to help you decide if this is the right lender for you.
 Cosigner option Autopay discount of 0.25% Prequalification check available High minimum APR Inflexible monthly due date No hardship assistance 
Personal loan borrowers experiencing economic hardship as a direct result of the coronavirus pandemic, are eligible to request an economic hardship deferral of payments for 90 days.
 
Most approved loans are funded within approximately seven business days. The time frame can vary depending on the complexity of the application and the number of applications pending.﻿﻿ Once the loan is approved and a disbursement date is scheduled, you should receive the funds within approximately 24 hours.﻿﻿
 
To be eligible for a Laurel Road personal loan, you'll need to:
 
To apply, complete the application. Here's what you'll be asked to do:
 
At this point, you'll agree to let Laurel Road do a soft credit check for prequalification (if you haven't already). Then, assuming you've qualified, you'll move on to finishing the full application. You'll add even more financial and personal details, including the option to select a cosigner. Your cosigner will need to provide the same information as you, including credit history and employment information.
 
As Laurel Road's personal loans are unsecured, your credit history and financial profile are the most significant determining factors in qualifying for a loan. 
 
Yes. Laurel Road offers personal loan refinancing.﻿﻿ You can note this as your aim in your application. 
 Laurel Road offers competitive APRs for those who have credit scores in the solid-but-not-spectacular range. As its minimum rate is high compared with those of other lenders, it might not be your best option if you have an excellent credit score. However, with no major fees, a quick prequalification form, and a nice autopay discount, Laurel Road is a good option for most people. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
