
If you're wondering whether it makes sense to buy life insurance, ask yourself this one question: "Would my death leave anyone in a financial bind?" If your answer is "yes," then it may be time to get serious about shopping for life insurance. Life insurance can offer peace of mind, helping to ensure that your debts or loved ones will be financially taken care of in the event of your death. But before considering whether or not to buy it, you may want to ask yourself if you'll qualify, and whether you should purchase term or permanent life insurance.
 
The rule of thumb is once you become a parent, any adult in your house earning an income should have life insurance coverage that will last until the youngest child completes college. If you have significant financial obligations such as high credit card debt or a mortgage, you could use life insurance to ensure that debt is covered. Because life-insurance death benefits are generally exempt from federal taxation, many financial planners often use clients' life-insurance benefits to help pay for any applicable estate taxes generated upon the death of a loved one.﻿﻿
 
To determine if you qualify, most life-insurance policies require you to undergo a medical exam. Prior to issuing a policy, the insurance company will also check things such as your medical history, hobbies, credit rating, and driving record. Factors such as age, smoking and prior health issues can also drive up the premiums on a policy.
 
The two primary methods used to determine the amount of insurance an individual requires are the "human life approach" and the "needs approach." The first projects an individual's income through their remaining working life expectancy, and then the present value of the life is determined by means of a discount rate. With the needs approach, all reoccurring and unusual expenditures are examined to determine the amount of life insurance needed.
 Age, health, and whether or not the person seeking life insurance smokes all factor into the price of a policy. 
Term life insurance is pure insurance protection that pays a predetermined sum if the insured dies during a specified period of time.﻿﻿ On the death of the insured person, term insurance pays the face value of the policy to the named beneficiary. All premiums paid are used to cover the cost of insurance protection.
 
The term may be one, five, 10, 20 years, or longer. But unless it's renewed, the insurance coverage ends when the term of the policy expires. Since this is temporary insurance coverage, it is the least expensive type to acquire.﻿﻿
 
Here are the main characteristics of term life insurance:
 Term life insurance pays a set amount if the insured passes away during a specific time period, and is considered to be "temporary" insurance, while permanent life insurance guarantees insurance for life, provided the premiums continue to be paid on time. 
Permanent life insurance provides life time insurance protection (does not expire), but the premiums must be paid on time. Most permanent policies offer a savings or investment component combined with the insurance coverage.﻿﻿ This component, in turn, causes premiums to be higher than those of term insurance. The investment may offer a fixed interest rate or be in the form of money market securities, bonds or mutual funds. This savings portion of the policy allows the policy owner to build cash value within the policy which can be borrowed or distributed at some time in the future.
 
Here are the main characteristics of permanent life insurance:
 
There are three basic types of permanent insurance: whole life, variable life, and universal life. The two most common are whole life and universal life. Whole life insurance provides lifetime protection—for which you pay a predetermined premium.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ Cash values usually have a minimum guaranteed rate of interest and the death benefit is a fixed amount. Whole life insurance is the most expensive life insurance product available.
 
Universal life insurance separates the investment and the death benefit portions. The investment choices available usually include some type of equity investments, which may make your cash value accumulate quicker. Over time, you can usually change your premiums and death benefits to suit your current budget.
 
When seeking insurance, don't rush into buying expensive permanent life insurance before considering if term life insurance sufficiently meets your needs. Unfortunately, in many cases, the fees charged for policies with investment features far outweigh the benefits. As such, be sure to carefully consider all of your options in order to locate the best life insurance policy for your circumstances.
 
By purchasing life insurance, you're betting that you'll live, but also securing peace of mind in case it doesn't work out that way. Don't leave your family unprotected in the sudden event of your death—after all, they are your most important assets.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Life Insurance & Disability Insurance Proceeds." Accessed June 20, 2020. USA.gov. "Personal Insurance." Accessed June 20, 2020. Insurance Information Institute. "What are the different types of permanent life insurance policies?" Accessed June 20, 2020. Insurance Information Institute. "What are the principal types of life insurance?" Accessed June 20, 2020.