
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Live Oak Bank was founded in 2008 and has its roots in lending to small businesses in specialized industries. It’s since expanded to include personal deposit accounts. An online bank, Live Oak is headquartered in Wilmington, N.C.
 Decent interest rates  No monthly maintenance fees No minimum amount to open an account and no minimum balance  No bells or whistles No debit card No ATM access 
Live Oak Bank should appeal to consumers who are looking for a digital bank in which to stash their cash and earn some interest. It’s particularly fitting for those who:
 
Live Oak Bank offers one thing and one thing only: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)-backed deposit accounts.
 
Live Oak Bank’s high-yield savings account has a more than acceptable 0.70% APY. Account holders don’t have to worry about paying a monthly maintenance fee, nor are there any minimum balance requirements. However, fee-free banking ends there. If you go over the six transactions per monthly statement cycle, you’ll get dinged with $10 per transaction. The nonsufficient funds fee is $25, and returned items cost $10. Should there be a stop payment, you’re looking at coughing up $25. 
 
CDs provide a means to save your money for a given period of time. They typically have higher interest rates than savings accounts, meaning your money can grow faster. Live Oak Bank’s CDs don’t have any monthly account fees. The terms are anywhere from six months to five years. However, the amount you need to open a CD is $2,500, and the maximum balance is $250,000.
 
There is a fee if you need to pull money before the CD matures. The early withdrawal penalty is a portion of the interest earned, and it depends on the length of the CD. For CDs with a term that’s less than 24 months, the early withdrawal penalty is 90 days of simple interest. For CDs with a term that’s over 24 months, you’ll be charged 180 days of simple interest.
 
What happens once the term of the CD ends and the CD matures? It will automatically renew for the same term at the current interest rate. You do have the option to withdraw your money from your CD, and you have 10 calendar days after the maturity date to do so.
 
The Live Oak Bank terms and rates for CDs are:
