
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
There are many reasons to apply for a personal loan. You may want to consolidate credit card debt, fund a wedding, or pay for home improvements. To qualify for a low interest personal loan, though, you need to be a creditworthy borrower. The best lenders are looking for a steady income, good to excellent credit, and a low debt-to-income ratio. 
 
To create our list, we looked at the most competitive personal loan interest rates—along with 25 important data points.
 
SoFi offers one of the most competitive personal loans on the market. With low interest rates and exclusive member benefits, SoFi’s personal loan may be a good fit if you have good to excellent credit.
 Low starting interest rate of 5.99% for the most creditworthy borrowers Ability to prequalify with a soft credit check Unemployment protection if you experience a layoff Tough to qualify with less than good to excellent credit Funding takes longer than some of SoFi’s competitors Better rates elsewhere for borrowers with excellent credit 
Other important information:
 
   Read the full review: SoFi
 
LightStream, an online lender owned by SunTrust Bank, offers interest rates as low as 3.99% for borrowers with good to excellent credit. The most creditworthy borrowers may qualify for a personal loan up to $100,000.﻿﻿ Low interest rates and large loan amounts make LightStream a good fit for borrowers with a strong credit history.
 Low starting interest rate of 3.99% for certain types of loans No fees for loan origination, prepayment, or late payments Autopay discount of 0.5% Tough to qualify without a good to excellent credit score No option to prequalify for a personal loan without hurting your credit score Online-only application 
Other important information:
 LightStream’s lowest interest rates and longest repayment term aren’t available for all loan types. 
Read the full review: LightStream
 
Marcus by Goldman Sachs offers a competitive personal loan for borrowers with good to excellent credit. The most creditworthy borrowers may qualify for interest rates starting as low as 6.99%, no personal loan fees, and payment flexibility. It may be a good fit if your credit is strong and you need up to $40,000 to pay off high-interest debt.﻿﻿
 No fees for loan origination, prepayment, late payments, or other fees  Change your payment due date up to three times during the life of your loan On-time payment reward that defers one payment after 12 consecutive on-time payments Difficult to qualify without a strong credit history Less competitive interest rates for longer-term loans   No cosigners allowed 
Other important information:
 
   Read the full review: Marcus
 
Alliant, a nationwide credit union, offers personal loans with competitive interest rates. Alliant’s Debt Protection program is a feature that may cancel your monthly payment—or even the entire balance—under certain circumstances.﻿﻿ Alliant’s personal loan may be a good option for credit union members with good to excellent credit.
 Low interest rates with a maximum APR of 10.24% Possible to receive the money within the same business day No origination or prepayment fees Membership in the credit union required Extra fee for debt protection program Shorter loan terms of up to 60 months 
Other important information:
 
American Express offers a solid personal loan for existing customers. Those targeted with an offer may check rates with a soft credit check.﻿﻿ American Express’ personal loan may be a good option for those with good to excellent credit who want to consolidate credit card debt.
 Competitive interest rates starting as low as 6.98% Prequalify for personal loan without hurting your credit score Consolidate credit card debt by sending proceeds directly to your creditor Exclusive offer for existing American Express customers No flexibility on payment due date Slow loan funding compared with some competitors 
Other important information:
 
Payoff is a peer to peer lender launched in 2005 and headquartered in Tustin, California. The lender offers rates as low as 5.99%, which is competitive even with loans requiring a good credit score. The downside is that Payoff isn’t available nationwide.
 Ability to check rate with affecting credit score Access to FICO credit score No prepayment penalty Not available in all states High minimum loan amount Individual applications only 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Payoff 
 
Wells Fargo is probably one of the largest and most well-known banks in the U.S. Existing customers can apply for a personal loan online or over the phone, whereas new customers will need to head to their 5,400+ branches. Rates start as low as 5.74% if you can qualify for the relationship discount.
 Minimal fees Offers rate discounts Different options to apply for a loan Cannot prequalify, so you’ll be subject to a hard credit inquiry New customers need to show up at a Wells Fargo branch Bank has history of scandals 
Other important information:
 
Read the full review: Wells Fargo
 
Personal loans from PenFed Credit Union are best for those looking for short-term loans and low borrowing amounts. Applicants can qualify for loans as low as $500 with rates starting at 6.49%. To become a member, applicants need to join the National Military Family Organization or Voice for America’s Troops for $17.
 No origination fees Can submit joint applications Loans as low as $500 No prequalification option available Borrowers need to be member of credit union Loans max out at $20,000 
Other important information:
 
A low interest rate personal loan is a type of installment loan. These personal loans are fixed amounts with a defined payoff timeline and usually have a fixed interest rate. Low interest rate loans are among the most competitive to qualify for, which means you will pay less over the life of the loan. Your interest rate is typically much lower than the average credit card.
 
There are several options for getting a low interest personal loan. These options may include:
 
You may apply for a personal loan through a traditional or brick-and-mortar bank.
 5.74% to 24.24% with relationship discount American Express 6.98% to 19.98% TD Bank 6.99% to 21.99% with autopay discount 
You may also find competitive personal loan options through nonprofit credit unions.
 Alliant Credit Union 6.24% to 10.24% with autopay discount PenFed 6.49% to 17.99% Navy Federal 7.49% to 18% 
You may find personal loans through online lenders that don’t typically have a physical location.
 LightStream 3.49% to 19.99% with autopay discount SoFi 5.99% to 16.19% with autopay discount 
You may also borrow from a peer-to-peer lender. These companies facilitate lending and borrowing between individuals.
 5.99% to 29.99% 
The average 24-month personal loan interest rate is 9.63%, according to the latest Federal Reserve data. Depending on your creditworthiness, personal loan interest rates may range from 6% to 36%, which is higher than the options from our list.
 
Low interest rate personal loans can be tough to qualify for. You generally have to be among the most creditworthy borrowers to get approved. Lenders are looking for steady income, good to excellent credit, and a reasonable debt-to-income ratio.
 
A low interest rate personal loan is an excellent way to pay off high-interest debt or pay for home improvements. However, you should always examine your family’s monthly budget—and ability to pay back the loan—before applying for any type of loan.
 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders for all borrowing needs. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 SoFi.com. "Personal Loans." Accessed Sept. 28, 2020. SoFi.com. "Eligibility Criteria." Accessed May 15, 2020.  SoFi.com. "FAQs: Personal Loans: How long does it take to receive the funds?" Accessed May 15, 2020. LightStream.com. "Home." Accessed May 15, 2020.  LightStream.com. "FAQs: Loan Use." Accessed May 15, 2020. Marcus.com. "Personal Loans." Accessed May 15, 2020. Marcus.com. "Personal Loans: Common Sense Questions About Personal Loans: Am I eligible for a Marcus personal loan?" Accessed May 15, 2020. Marcus.com. "Frequently Asked Questions: Loan Application: When will I receive my funds?" Accessed May 15, 2020. Marcus.com. "Frequently Asked Questions: About Personal Loans From Marcus: How can I use a debt consolidation loan from Marcus to pay off my debt?" Accessed May 15, 2020. AlliantCreditUnion.org. "Protect What Matters - Debt Protection." Accessed May 15, 2020.  AlliantCreditUnion.org. "Personal loans, personalized for you." Accessed May 15, 2020.