
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Marcus—the online-only banking lender by Goldman Sachs—provides personal loans with no fees. You’re only required to pay the principal and the interest, although interest rates for Marcus loans are a little higher when compared to competitors. If you have a good credit score and want to avoid extra fees, you may want to explore a Marcus loan.
 
Our Marcus personal loan review breaks down everything you need to know, so you can see if a Marcus personal loan is right for you. 
 No fees Autopay discount of 0.25% Prequalification available Flexible monthly payment option Long time to receive funds Good credit required No joint or cosigner options 
if you have a Marcus personal loan and have been impacted by COVID-19, you can postpone making a payment on your loan for one month. There will be no interest charged during the deferral and your loan term will be extended by one month. 
 
You can request the deferral through the customer assistance program in your loan dashboard.
 
Marcus currently offers borrowers several personal loan options that they can use for a variety of purposes. Personal loans are available to help finance debt consolidation, home improvement, weddings, vacations, moving, and relocation.
 
It can take anywhere from one to four days to get your funds.﻿﻿ The time may vary based on the time of day that your application is processed.
 
As long as you’re 18 years of age with a U.S. bank account and Social Security number (or Tax ID number), you’re eligible to apply for a Marcus personal loan.﻿﻿ Here’s what to expect from your Marcus personal loan application.
 
After completing your application, you’ll be able to set your monthly due date and a bank account to accept your loan funds.
 
Right now, you can’t refinance a loan with a Marcus personal loan.
 If you have a solid credit score and need to take out a personal loan, Marcus by Goldman Sachs has competitive offers. The biggest differentiator between Marcus and others is that Marcus doesn’t charge any fees whatsoever. Even if you’re late making a payment, you could see your credit score drop and interest add up, but you won’t ever get hit with a late payment fee. You can’t take out a dollar amount larger than $40,000, and it could take a while to receive your funds (up to four days). Marcus personal loans also offer attractive rates for many people, though not necessarily the best rates for borrowers with excellent credit. Still, it’s a solid choice if you’re in search of a personal loan. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
