
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Marcus is a recent addition to the offerings from 150-year-old Wall Street investment bank Goldman Sachs, having launched in 2016.﻿﻿ Officially known as “Marcus by Goldman Sachs,” it is an online-only bank offering high-yield savings accounts, high-yield and penalty-free certificates of deposit (CDs), and no-fee personal loans. This comprehensive review of Marcus will help you decide if it is the right financial institution for you.
 Higher-than-average savings and CD rates No monthly fees on savings accounts No minimum deposits on savings, low minimum deposits on CDs Penalty-free CDs Fixed-rate personal loans with no fees No checking accounts No ATM network No branches No mobile check deposits 
Marcus by Goldman Sachs will appeal to customers who are looking for excellent rates from a trusted name in banking. It will be an especially good fit for customers who:
 
Marcus by Goldman Sachs has a limited menu of product offerings, although it strives to make its small list of products stand out. These offerings include:
 
The high-yield savings account is Marcus’ only traditional bank account offering. Still, no minimum deposit, no monthly maintenance fee, and a 0.80% APY mean this account is structured to give savers the biggest bang for their bucks.
 
Marcus offers two types of CD: High-Yield CD and No-Penalty CD. The High-Yield version has more term options, ranging from six months to 72 months. Both types of CD have a minimum deposit of $500.
 
The High-Yield CD offers a 10-day CD rate guarantee. Open a CD and deposit at least $500 within 10 days, and even if the rate has gone up within that 10-day period, you’ll automatically get the highest rate available during it. In addition, High-Yield CD holders have 30 days following the day they opened the account to fully fund the CD.
 
If you need to access the money in your High-Yield CD prior to its maturity date, you will pay an early withdrawal penalty. The penalty is 90 days of interest for CDs with terms of 12 months or less, 270 days of interest for CDs with terms between 12 months and five years, and 365 days of interest for CDs with terms greater than five years.﻿﻿
 
No-Penalty CDs don’t have the same rates offered by the High-Yield CDs, but that is because you can withdraw the entire balance of your No-Penalty CD without giving up any of your interest, provided the CD has been fully funded for at least seven days. However, you cannot make a partial withdrawal from your No-Penalty CD.﻿﻿
 Pay close attention to your CD’s maturity date. If you do not take any action to withdraw your balance within 10 days of it, Marcus will automatically renew your CD for another term. 
Other than its single high-yield savings account and the High-Yield and No Penalty CDs, the only other product Marcus offers is its no-fee personal loan. The no-fee promise includes late fees if you miss a payment, make a late payment, or underpay. Rather than charge you for any of these actions, Marcus instead simply allows your loan to accrue more interest, thereby increasing the size of your final payment.
 
In keeping with its apparent focus on doing a few things extremely well, Marcus’ personal loans were ranked highest in customer satisfaction by J.D. Power in 2019.﻿﻿
 
With no branches, Marcus customers must access their accounts online, via the mobile app, or even over the phone. However, even without brick-and-mortar branches, Marcus offers a number of methods for getting your questions answered. To start, the FAQ section on the Marcus by Goldman Sachs website provides detailed and easy-to-understand responses to a comprehensive list of potential questions.
 
Customers can also access a live chat while logged onto their accounts on the Marcus website, as well as reach customer service representatives by phone seven days a week.
 
As an online-only bank, Marcus also has a robust mobile app that is available for both iOS and Android. The iOS version has a near-perfect 4.9-star rating on the Apple Store, while the Android version enjoys a 4.4-star rating.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Opening an account or applying for a loan with Marcus only takes a few minutes on its website. However, if you do not already have an external checking account, it will be more difficult for you to access Marcus’s offerings.
 
Though the bank’s mobile app is otherwise robust and user-friendly, it does not allow for a mobile check deposit. If you need to make a deposit into your high-yield savings account, you will have to mail a paper check, make a transfer from a linked external bank account, set up a direct deposit, or effectuate a wire transfer.
 Marcus by Goldman Sachs may not offer much in the way of banking products, but it provides maximum value to its customers within the narrow confines of the few products on offer. Thanks to highly competitive APYs on its savings and CD accounts, as well as its no-fee personal loans, customers looking for these specific products will likely be satisfied with their options. That said, the limited number of products means that Marcus is not a bank that will work for anyone who is looking for a convenient institution to handle all of their banking needs. The fact that there is no checking account, no ATM access, and no mobile check deposit make this more of a niche banking option rather than one that will appeal to a large swath of customers. This means that Marcus customers are likely a self-selecting group that is specifically looking to maximize APY and minimize personal loan fees. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks—including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility—to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 GoldmanSachs.com. "Marcus by Goldman Sachs Leverages Technology and Legacy of Financial Expertise in Dynamic Consumer Finance Platform." Accessed May 5, 2020. Marcus.com. "The High-Yield Online Savings Account You Deserve." Accessed May 5, 2020. Marcus.com. "Frequently Asked Questions: Online Savings Account Facts: Is there a minimum deposit required to open an Online Savings Account?" Accessed May 5, 2020. Marcus.com. "We're Offering Personal Loans With No Fees. Ever: See if you're eligible for a personal loan from Marcus." Accessed May 5, 2020.