
Married filing separately is a tax status for married couples who choose to record their respective incomes, exemptions, and deductions on separate tax returns. There is a potential tax advantage to filing separately when one spouse has significant medical expenses or miscellaneous itemized deductions or when both spouses have about the same amount of income.
 
Married filing separately can be contrasted with married filing jointly.
 
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) gives taxpayers five different tax filing status options when they submit their annual tax returns: single, married filing jointly, married filing separately, head of household, or qualifying widow(er). Anyone who files as married in either category—filing separately or filing jointly—must be married as of the end of the tax year. So someone who files as married on April 15, 2020, should have been married no later than Dec. 31, 2019.
 
Using the married filing separately status may be appealing and offer financial advantages to certain couples. Combining their incomes and filing jointly might push them into a higher tax bracket and, therefore, increase their tax bill. Filing separately, on the other hand, may keep a couple’s tax liability at bay.
 Although there are financial advantages to filing separately, couples miss out on tax credits meant for couples who file jointly. 
When couples file separately, the IRS requires taxpayers to include their spouse’s information on their returns. According to the IRS, if you and your spouse file separate returns and one of you itemizes deductions, the other spouse will have a standard deduction of zero. Therefore, the other spouse should also itemize deductions.
 
Note that thanks to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, the standard deduction rose substantially in the 2018 tax year. For 2020 taxes filed in April 2021, it climbed again to $12,400 for individuals and $24,800 for married filing jointly. As a result of this change, one spouse must have significant miscellaneous deductions or medical expenses in order for the couple to gain any advantage from filing separately.
 
Married filing jointly offers the most tax savings, especially when spouses have different income levels. If you use the married filing separately status, you are unable to take advantage of a number of potentially valuable tax breaks. Some important breaks include:
 
As a couple who files joint tax returns, you can also take deductions for your contributions to a traditional individual retirement account (IRA) and for any expenses related to the adoption of a qualifying child.
 
Tax bills aside, there is one scenario in which married filing separately may be especially wise. If you don’t want to be liable for your spouse’s taxes, and suspect they are hiding income or claiming deductions or credits falsely, filing separately is probably the best option.
 
Signing a joint return means both spouses are responsible for the accuracy of the return and for any tax liabilities or penalties that may apply. By signing your own return and not a joint one, you are only responsible for the accuracy of your own information and for any tax liability and penalties that may ensue.
 
If you live in community property states, which include Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin, you may need to see a tax professional, because the rules about separate incomes can be tricky.
