
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  MEFA 
Our Take
 
As a non-profit organization, MEFA is an excellent choice if you need to take out a private student loan. It offers fixed-rate loans with competitive interest rates, multiple repayment options, and doesn’t charge any fees—it doesn’t even charge late payment fees.
 No fees Multiple repayment options Cosigner release available Borrow up to the total cost of attendance Loan prequalification not available No autopay discount Maximum deferral periods apply Only fixed-rate loans available  MEFA 
The Massachusetts Educational Financing Authority (MEFA) was created in 1982 by the Massachusetts state legislature. Its goal is to offer low-cost college financing options to undergraduate and graduate students. 
 MEFA student loans are serviced by American Education Services 
MEFA is a non-profit, self-funded, and state-chartered student loan organization. It provides financial literacy programs, offers loan discharge in the case of student death or disability, and doesn’t charge origination or application fees. MEFA allows you to borrow up to the total cost of attendance and has multiple repayment options.
 
Here’s what you need to know about MEFA student loans. 
 MEFA doesn’t offer an autopay discount, but it’s still a good idea to sign up for automatic payments to minimize the risk of missing a payment. 
Student loans are available to undergraduate and graduate students who are U.S. citizens or permanent residents. Students must be enrolled at least half-time at an eligible non-profit college or university. ﻿﻿
 
If you’re pursuing a bachelor’s degree, you can apply for an undergraduate student loan from MEFA. The loans have competitive, fixed rates, and you can choose between a 10- and a 15-year term. If you’re enrolled for the current academic year, you can use a MEFA loan for summer session expenses. 
 
Undergraduate loans have four repayment options: ﻿﻿
 Minimum: $2,000 for a private school, $1,500 for a public school 
If you’re working toward a master’s degree, you can borrow up to the total cost of attendance with a MEFA graduate school loan. The loans have competitive, fixed rates and a 15-year term. ﻿﻿
 
MEFA graduate school loans have two repayment options:﻿﻿ 
 Minimum: $2,000 for a private school, $1,500 for a public school 
To qualify for a student loan from MEFA, you must meet these requirements: ﻿﻿
 
MEFA does not have a loan prequalification tool. The only way to find out if you qualify for a loan and see what interest rate you’ll get is to submit a loan application. When you apply, MEFA will check your credit, which can affect your credit score. 
 
MEFA does not charge origination or application fees. It doesn’t even charge late fees or returned payment fees.
 
That doesn’t mean there isn’t any penalty for missing payments. If you fall behind on your student loan payments, MEFA will report the missed payments to the major credit bureaus. The lender can also send your account to collections and take you to court. ﻿﻿
 
MEFA does not offer any loan discounts.  
 
MEFA has four repayment plans for undergraduate loans:﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
MEFA does not have a referral or rewards program. 
 
MEFA doesn’t require applicants to have a co-signer. Co-signers are eligible for release after 48 consecutive monthly payments have been made on-time as long as the borrower meets the current underwriting standards. ﻿﻿
 The lender states that most undergraduate students will need a co-signer to qualify for a loan. 
MEFA does not include specific information about financial hardship programs on its website. However, it does encourage MEFA borrowers who are unable to afford their payments to contact their loan servicer—American Education Services (AES)—to apply for modified payment terms to get some relief. ﻿﻿
 
If the student borrower dies or becomes totally and permanently disabled, the loan is discharged. ﻿﻿
 
Once you submit your application, MEFA will review it and will notify you of its decision. If approved, it will ask you to log in to your account to sign the loan agreement. ﻿﻿
 
Next, MEFA will send the loan documents to your school for certification. Some schools won’t certify loans until closer to the semester start date, so the process can take several weeks to complete. Once the school certifies the loan, MEFA will disburse the funds directly to the school. ﻿﻿
 It’s a good idea to apply for a loan well in advance to ensure you get the money you need on time. 
Student loan refinancing is available for undergraduate and graduate student loans. You can choose between fixed and variable-rate loans and seven, 10, and 15-year terms. The minimum refinance amount is $10,000. ﻿﻿
 
MEFA’s student loans are serviced by American Education Services. Unfortunately, AES doesn’t have a stellar reputation as a loan servicer. 
 
According to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s (CFPB) 2019 Annual Report of the Student Loan Ombudsman, it received 2,900 complaints about private student loan companies between September 1, 2018, and August 31, 2019. Of those complaints, 180—about 7%— were about AES.﻿﻿ A common complaint was that the servicer provided bad information about borrowers’ loans. ﻿﻿
 
If you need to reach customer service during the application process, you can email MEFA at MEFALoans@MEFA.org or call 800-266-0243 between 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. EST, Monday through Friday. 
 
You’ll need the following information to fill out an application: 
 
If you are a U.S. citizen or permanent resident, make sure you fill out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid and apply for federal, state, and institutional financial aid you’re entitled to before applying for a loan from a private lender like MEFA. 
 
If you reach the annual borrowing limits with federal student loans and still need money to pay for school, it’s a good idea to shop around and compare loans from multiple private lenders to find the best option for your needs.
 If you have access to a credit-worthy cosigner, MEFA is a good option for a private student loan. With multiple loan terms and repayment options, you can borrow up to the total cost of attendance, and MEFA doesn’t charge any added fees. However, it doesn’t have the added benefits and discounts that some other lenders offer, and it doesn’t have a clear forbearance policy. If those features are important to you, you may want to consider another lender. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of student loan lenders. We collected over 45 data points across more than 15 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their education needs.
 MEFA. “What You Need to Know About MEFA Loans.” Accessed July 22, 2020. MEFA. “Undergraduate Student Loans.” Accessed July 22, 2020.