
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Based in Utah, online-only Merrick Bank was founded in 1997 as a subsidiary of the New York–based financial services firm CardWorks. Merrick Bank is not a traditional banking institution and offers no checking, savings, or money market accounts. Instead, the institution focuses on credit cards, loans, and certificates of deposit (CDs) and is geared toward customers with lower credit scores. This in-depth review can help you determine if Merrick Bank’s products will work for you.
 High CD yields Lower-than-average APR on secured and unsecured credit cards Specializes in boat and RV financing Focuses on helping customers with lower credit scores $25,000 minimum CD deposit Confusing credit card fees Loan rates not listed online No typical deposit accounts 
Merrick Bank is going to work best for customers who are looking to get a credit card or loan despite a lackluster credit history. It will especially appeal to customers who:
 
This institution only offers a few of the products and services you might expect from a bank. These include:
 
Merrick Bank’s CDs offer a higher-than-usual rate compared with the national average for CDs. However, the minimum deposit to open a CD is a steep $25,000, which may put this product out of reach for many potential customers.
 
You can purchase a CD in any one of the following terms:
 
Merrick Bank also levies a fairly stiff penalty for early withdrawal. CDs with a term of 364 days or less will pay a penalty equal to 1% of the account balance or seven days’ interest, whichever is greater. CDs with a term of 365 days to 729 days have an early withdrawal penalty equal to 2% of the account balance or seven days’ interest, whichever is greater. And CDs with a term of 730 days or more have a penalty equal to 3% of the account balance or seven days’ interest, whichever is greater.
 
Customers have access to two credit cards through Merrick Bank: the Platinum Visa and the Secured Visa.
 
Merrick Bank boasts only one physical location in the country, its corporate headquarters in South Jordan, Utah. However, you can reach a customer service agent by phone at 1-800-204-5936, although it’s unclear as to what hours the phones are staffed.
 
Merrick Bank also has a mobile app on which you can make payments, contact customer service, check your balance, manage account notifications, access your FICO score once per month, and even freeze your card in case of loss or theft. However, the app is not highly rated on the Apple Store, with an average rating of 2.7 stars out of five.﻿﻿ Google Play users appear to like the app better, rating it 4.1 stars out of five.﻿﻿
 
Potential credit card customers can see if they are prequalified for the Platinum Visa online. If you are not, you can apply for the Secured Visa online.
 
Borrowers can apply for a loan online, and customers who wish to purchase a CD can do so online as well. Customers looking for a boat, an RV, or a horse trailer loan may see if they qualify and apply at one of the thousands of participating dealers across the country.
 
Once you have set up your credit card, loan, or CD, you can access information about your account either online or through the smartphone app.
