
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Miles & More World Elite Mastercard is a travel rewards card that allows you to earn rewards with Lufthansa and some smaller European airlines. It has an $89 annual fee but offers a complimentary annual companion certificate, as well as generous one-time offer features.
 Earn 50,000 award miles after spending $3,000 in purchases within the first 90 days and payment of the annual fee. The Miles & More World Elite Credit Card is not one of our top-rated airline credit cards. You can review our list of the airline credit cards for what we think are better options. Strong one-time offer Companion tickets after first purchase and on card anniversary 0% APR balance-transfer offer $89 annual fee 
The Miles & More World Elite Mastercard is best suited to travelers who want to earn rewards and bonuses on Lufthansa and its eight Miles & More airline partners, and who otherwise plan to use the card sparingly. That’s because purchases from Miles & More carriers earn two points per dollar spent, and all other purchases earn just a single point. In contrast to some other airline cards, then, the Miles & More World Elite Mastercard has no other bonus rewards categories, such as spending on other travel, gas, or groceries.
 
For travelers who are carrying a sizable balance on another card, the 0% APR offer provides another incentive to apply for the Miles & More World Elite Mastercard. Even after accounting for the transfer fee, you could easily save hundreds of dollars in interest if you transferred a four-figure balance to the card—and paid it off by the time the 0% APR 15-month period expired. 
 
This one-time offer for the Miles & More World Elite Mastercard is 50,000 award miles. To qualify for it, you need to spend $3,000 within the first 90 days of opening their account and pay the card's annual fee. 
 
According to our valuation, miles earned with this card are worth an estimated 2.16 cents apiece when used for flights. So the bonus could be worth a generous $1,080 in tickets on Lufthansa or its eight partners. 
 
Here's a closer look at how the rewards program works for this card, including how many miles you can earn and where. 
 
When you purchase tickets directly with the card’s nine Miles & More airline partners, you earn two miles per dollar. Those miles are unlimited, so the more you spend each year the more award miles you can earn. 
 
Here are the current Miles & More travel alliance airlines with which you can earn 2 miles per dollar spent for purchases on the card: 
 
You can also earn one mile per dollar on all other purchases, regardless of the category or merchant. These miles are also unlimited. 
 
Miles earned with this card can be redeemed for award flights and upgrades with the integrated Miles & More airline travel partners listed above. That includes regular award travel and special award flights. 
 
We value miles earned with this card at 2.16 cents each when used for flights. As examples of the cost of award flights, an economy flight between European destinations starts at 35,000 miles. But you'd need a minimum of 60,000 miles to book an economy ticket between Europe and North America.
 
At the higher end of the spectrum a First-Class Round the World fare could require as many as 500,000 miles.You may also use miles for hotels and rental cars, although offers seem to be focused on Europe and the few disclosed rates are high—like Porsche rentals in Germany “starting at 83,000 miles per day.” You can also buy gift cards from such retailers as Starbucks, Barnes & Noble, and The Gap, but as with most credit cards, these appear to offer a poor redemption value—with miles worth only about a third of a cent each.
 
Miles & More offers a miles calculator you can use to determine how many miles you'll need to book an award flight. 
 
You also have the option to convert award miles earned by flying (not from bonuses) to status miles at a 5 to 1 ratio, to a maximum of 25,000 award miles per year. This option could allow a Miles & More flyer who, say, falls 12,000 status miles short of earning the 35,000 such miles required for Frequent Traveller status (the lowest elite tier) to trade in 4,000 award miles earned from flying to reach that status. That elite tier allows you to earn additional miles per dollar spent as well as other benefits.     
 
Maximizing rewards with this card begins with ensuring you spend the $3,000 in the first 90 days that’s required to earn its one-time offer of 50,000 miles. After that, use the card for all purchases from Lufthansa and the eight other small carriers on which you earn the best rewards on this card. 
 
Here are two scenarios to give you an idea of how many miles you could earn with the Miles & More World Elite Mastercard, and what those rewards might be worth. 
 
This assumes you’re a fairly frequent traveler on Lufthansa who, due to its modest rewards on all other purchases, uses the Miles & More World Elite Mastercard only to purchase flights. Your total spending is $5,000 a year, on which you'd earn 10,000 award miles (at the rate of 2 miles per dollar spent). At 2.16 cents each, these miles rewards could be worth $216 in travel value. 
