
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Navy Federal Credit Union, established in 1933, offers numerous financial services to more than 9 million members, including personal loans.﻿﻿ Members of the credit union may qualify to borrow up to $50,000. 
 
If you have a fair credit rating and are a member (or eligible to join), it’s worth finding out if you qualify for a personal loan. Navy Federal’s maximum annual percentage rate (APR) for personal loans is 18%—considerably lower than the maximum APR many other lenders charge. 
 Lengthy repayment terms available Wide range of loan amounts Potentially access funds the same day Minimal fees Must be a member of the credit union to qualify No prequalification feature Higher minimum APRs on lengthier loan terms 
Navy Federal Credit Union is offering a variety of options to members who have been affected by the coronavirus pandemic of 2020. Those who are eligible for assistance may be able to take advantage of loan extensions, payment deferment, pandemic relief loans, and more. Those who want to learn if they are eligible for loan extensions and deferments, including new members, should call for more details.
 
Navy Federal allows its members to use the personal loan funds they borrow for a variety of purposes. Loans are available for planned and unplanned personal expenses such as:
 
Borrowers may be able to access the funds they borrow from Navy Federal Credit Union quickly. Same-day funding occurs with most approved loans.﻿﻿
 
Navy Federal Credit Union might offer you a better deal than other online lenders, but you must first become a member of the credit union before you can apply for financing. You can discover if you are eligible for membership and join the credit union online, via phone, or at a branch. 
 
You can’t check your loan eligibility or your rate with a soft initial credit check. Therefore, you’ll need to complete an official application to discover whether you qualify for a personal loan and, if you do, the rate and terms the credit union will offer you. That will trigger a hard credit inquiry that will affect your credit score temporarily.
 
Members can apply for personal expense loans online. However, if you want to see if you are eligible for a home improvement loan, debt consolidation loan, shares secured loan, or certificate secured loan, you will need to call the credit union or visit a branch in person. 
 
You should be prepared to provide the following information with your application:﻿﻿ 
 
Navy Federal Credit Union allows its members to refinance certain types of loans from an outside lender with a new loan through the credit union.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ However, its website gives no indication that it is possible to refinance existing Navy Federal Credit Union personal loans.
 There are a number of reasons you might need to take out a personal loan. Unplanned expenses, home improvement projects, and high-interest debt consolidation are just a few examples of times when a personal loan might be a good idea.  Still, it’s wise to be sure you’re borrowing to improve your situation and not simply taking on debt that you could avoid. A personal loan should leave you in a better financial position, not a worse one.   Available nationwide, Navy Federal Credit Union offers its members competitive rates (especially for fair-credit borrowers given the low minimum credit score requirement) and minimal fees (no origination fees or prepayment penalties). That makes it an option worth considering if you need a personal loan. Plus, with a wide range of loan amounts and terms offered, Navy Federal can be a great contender if you're looking for a personal loan for a myriad of reasons. Unfortunately, there are membership requirements to join the credit union and there is no prequalification option. If this is a concern (or you can't meet the requirements), there are plenty of other competitors offering similar rates and terms. As with any lender, it’s wise to compare the loan offer you receive from Navy Federal with other lenders. Shopping around for the best deal on a personal loan could potentially save you a considerable amount of money over the life of your loan. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Navy Federal Credit Union. "Personal and Home Improvement Loans: Endnote." Accessed May 8, 2020. Navy Federal Credit Union. "Am I Eligible for Membership?" Accessed May 8, 2020. Navy Federal Credit Union. "Personal and Home Improvement Loans: Secure the Money You Need." Accessed May 8, 2020. Navy Federal Credit Union. "Loan Discounts for Active Duty and Retired Military Members." Accessed May 8, 2020. Navy Federal Credit Union. "The Ins and Outs of Co-signing a Loan." Accessed May 8, 2020.