
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Navy Federal Credit Union is the largest credit union in the world.﻿﻿ With more than 9 million members, it is a force in the banking universe, especially for those who serve or have served in the armed forces.
 Competitive rates on certificates No monthly fees on most savings and checking accounts Large fee-free ATM network  Small branch network Strict membership requirements Low interest rates compared with online banks  
Navy Federal Credit Union is a full-service credit union offering a wide range of products and services. It’s a good fit for customers who:
 
As the largest credit union in America, Navy Federal Credit Union offers a host of banking products:
 
Navy Federal has five checking accounts available currently. Each varies slightly, which means the credit union has an account for almost every need. All of the checking accounts currently earn a 0.05% annual percentage yield (APY) except Flagship checking, which earns between 0.35% and 0.45% APY. Here’s a breakdown of each checking option.
 Interest dividends are credited monthly to all checking accounts. 
Navy Federal offers a Membership Share Savings account, which is required to join the credit union. It is a basic savings account that earns a 0.25% APY. It requires an initial deposit of $5 to open a savings account.
 
There are two money market accounts available through Navy Federal Credit Union: Money Market Savings Account and Jumbo Money Market Savings Account. Both offer competitive rates near what’s offered with the best money market accounts.
 
Another popular account option through Navy Federal is its certificates, which are comparable to certificates of deposit (CDs). There are five CD options available through Navy Federal.
 Standard certificate rates are based on both term length and balance amount. Only accounts with a balance of $100,000 or more earn the highest interest rates. 
Navy Federal Credit Union offers a handful of credit cards too, including several rewards credit cards, a cash back card, and a secured credit card.
 
Navy Federal offers a host of other products and services:
 
Navy Federal members have access to a wide range of support options from the credit union. Phone support is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with options for domestic and international callers:
 
Other support options include chat, email, mail, and social media channels.
 
Navy Federal does give members online and mobile access, which aren’t options at many credit unions. Members can check balances, make payments, transfer money, and order checks from almost anywhere.
