
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  Navy Federal Credit Union 
Our Take
 
Military service members and their families who need to borrow money for college can take advantage of Navy Federal Credit Union student loans and borrow up to $120,000 for undergraduate degrees. Navy Federal Credit Union offers competitive rates and doesn’t charge prepayment penalties, but credit union membership is required.
 Both fixed and variable rate loans available No prepayment penalty Co-signer release available after just 24 months Credit union membership required Not all schools qualify as eligible institutions Only one repayment term available Payments required while in school  Navy Federal Credit Union 
Founded in 1933, Navy Federal Credit Union has more than 9 million members nationwide. Serving the military community, it offers a wide range of financial products including checking and savings accounts, mortgages, and private student loans. 
 
If you’ve exhausted all of your federal financial aid options and need additional financing for school, a student loan from Navy Federal Credit Union can help fill the gap. The lender offers fixed and variable rate loans, and doesn’t charge origination or application fees. Here’s all you need to know about Navy Federal Credit Union student loans.
 
Navy Federal partners with LendKey to issue student loans to U.S. citizens and permanent residents enrolled at eligible institutions. Loans are available for associate, bachelor’s, and graduate degrees. 
 
To qualify for a loan, borrowers must be members of the credit union, or qualify for membership and join the credit union when they apply for a loan online. ﻿﻿
 
For students going to school for their associate or bachelor’s degree, you can borrow up to $120,000 for your education expenses. You need to be enrolled at least half-time, and you can apply for a loan to cover the cost of one semester or the entire academic year. ﻿﻿
 
If you’re pursuing a master’s degree, you can borrow up to $160,000. The lender’s graduate school loans have the same interest rates and repayment options as its undergraduate loans.﻿﻿
 
To qualify for a student loan, you must meet the following requirements: ﻿﻿
 While a co-signer isn’t required, Navy Federal strongly recommends that undergraduate students add one to their application to increase their chances of qualifying. 
Unfortunately, Navy Federal doesn’t have a loan prequalification tool. The only way to find out if you’ll qualify for a loan and see what rate you qualify for is to submit a loan application and go through a credit check, which can lower your credit score temporarily. 
 Adding a cosigner to your loan application can increase your chances of qualifying for a loan. Nine out of 10 Navy Federal Credit Union student loan borrowers have a cosigner. 
Navy Federal Credit Union doesn’t charge application or origination fees and if you choose to pay off your student loan early, you won't have to pay a prepayment penalty. 
 
However, it does charge relatively high late fees. If you miss a payment, the lender will charge you $20. Wisconsin residents will be charged 5% of the late payment amount or $10, whichever is less. If a payment is returned to you for insufficient funds, the lender will charge you a $10 returned payment fee. ﻿﻿
 
If you sign up for automatic payments, you get a 0.25% interest rate discount. ﻿﻿
 
Navy Federal student loans all have 10-year terms. While in school, you are required to make payments, but you have two repayment options: ﻿﻿
 
Six months after you graduate, you’ll begin making principal and interest payments. 
 
Navy Federal doesn’t have a referral program. But the credit union does have a career assistance program for its members. You can access its online job search training system and resources, which include online tools and exercises, interview tips, and a job search dashboard. 
 Navy Federal Credit Union has a career assistance program for members where you can access job search tips, interview tools, and other resources. 
While Navy Federal Credit Union doesn’t require applicants to have a co-signer, most borrowers will need one to qualify for a loan. Adding a co-signer to your application will increase your chances of getting a loan and qualifying for a lower interest rate. 
 
Co-signers may be eligible for co-signer release after you’ve made 24 consecutive monthly principal and interest payments on time. ﻿﻿
 Nine out of 10 student borrowers have a co-signer, according to Navy Federal. 
Navy Federal does not list forbearance or discharge information in its loan materials or application. If you have trouble with your payments, you should contact your loan servicer—LendKey—right away. In some cases, you may be able to postpone your payments temporarily.
 
While the application takes just 15 minutes to complete online, Navy Federal recommends that applicants apply for a loan well in advance. The approval and disbursement process can take between two and four weeks to complete depending on your school, so make sure you give yourself plenty of time. ﻿﻿
 
Refinancing for undergraduate and graduate student loans is available. Variable and fixed-rate loans, and five, 10, and 15-year loan terms are offered. You can refinance up to $125,000 in undergraduate student loans and up to $175,000 in graduate student loans. 
 
Student loans are serviced by LendKey. LendKey is not included in the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s latest Student Loan Ombudsman Report, but it has a 4.5 TrustScore on TrustPilot—five is the highest—with over 240 customer reviews. ﻿﻿
 
Customer support is available Monday through Friday 9 a.m. until 8 p.m. EST. You can reach LendKey’s customer service by phone or email. 
 
Before applying for a private student loan from Navy Federal Credit Union or another lender, make sure you fill out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid and use any federal financial aid you’re eligible to receive first. 
 
Once you reach the federal borrowing limits, you can proceed with your loan application. You’ll need the following information: 
