
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Founded in 1999, NBKC Bank is known for its mortgage lending services and competitive rates on deposit accounts. Based in Kansas City, Missouri, it also has a large network of 32,000 ATMs in the U.S.
 Maintenance fee-free deposit accounts Up to $12 a month in ATM fees reimbursed Competitive interest rates on deposit accounts Limited brick-and-mortar locations High early withdrawal penalties for CDs 
NBKC Bank is a solid choice that, for the most part, offers fee-free checking and money market accounts. It’s particularly worth considering if you:
 
Known as a “personal account,” NBKC Bank’s checking account boasts a 0.80% APY, which is higher than the national average. Plus, there are no monthly account fees, overdraft fees, or charges for stopped payments or returned items. When you open an account, a book of starter checks is on them.
 
You can access your money with more than 32,000 ATMs in the MoneyPass network. What’s particularly nice about NBKC’s checking account is that you get up to $12 of non-network ATM fees reimbursed each month. To get started, you’ll need to deposit a minimum of $5.﻿﻿
 NBKC does charge for outgoing domestic wire transfers, which will cost you $5. International wires cost $45 for both incoming and outgoing transfers. 
While NBKC doesn’t offer a savings account, you can squirrel away funds in its money market account. The $5 minimum to open an account makes it accessible and on par with a traditional savings account. The current rate is 0.80%.﻿﻿
 
NBKC’s money market account features the same benefits as its checking account—no fees for the most part. And like its checking account, it comes with a debit card and check-writing capabilities. You also get a free book of starter checks.﻿﻿
 
With an NBKC CD, you can earn a little more than putting that money into a regular checking account. CDs in general feature higher interest rates and the longer the term, the more you earn in interest. Most CDs require a minimum of $1,000 to get started. ﻿﻿
 
Existing customers can make deposits in one and two-year CDs online. You can also chat with a customer service rep over the phone to make deposits in a two-year CD. For other CDs, you have to visit one of its physical branches in the Kansas City area.
 
In addition, If you have an existing account you have the option of investing in an NBKC CD with as little as $25. After opening an account, you link your CD to the account and auto save $25. The current rate for what the bank calls an "add-to-starter" CD as of September 2020 is 0.65% APY. You’ll need to set foot in one of its brick-and-mortar locations in Kansas City to open this particular CD.﻿﻿
 
Interest rates for CDs range between 0.35% and 0.90% and terms from three months to five years. The rates are as follows:
 
If you decide to take money out before the CD matures, you’ll be hit with an early withdrawal fee. The early withdrawal penalty depends on the term of the CD. The longer the term, the higher the penalty. For a 12-month CD, it’s 180 days worth of interest and 365 days of interest for the two-year CD, according to a customer service representative.
 You need to wait 75 days after depositing money in a CD to make an early withdrawal. 
NBKC Bank has partnered with Elan Financial Services to offer a variety of personal and business credit cards, including cash-back bonus credit cards and a secured credit card:
 
Cash Back Credit Cards 
 
Balance Transfer Credit Cards 
 
Credit Builder Credit Cards 
 
Business Credit Cards 
 
NBKC also has a wide array of other offerings including: 
 
If you need to report a lost or stolen card, you can reach out to NBKC customer service 24/7, 365 days a year. For everything else, customer service support via phone or online chat is available weekdays from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. CST.You can also send an email with any questions.
 
If you live in the Kansas City area, you can stop by one of NBKC’s four physical branches. You’ll want to check its website for specific information regarding reopening during the COVID-19 pandemic and about its health guidelines for visiting a brick-and-mortar location.
