
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  Nelnet 
Our Take
 
Nelnet is the largest servicer of federal student loans and administers the Total and Permanent Disability Discharge Program. Borrowers don’t get to choose their federal loan servicer but, if they’re unhappy, can change by consolidating or refinancing.
  Nelnet 
When you take out federal student loans, the U.S. Department of Education is your lender. However, you’re paired with another company—a loan servicer—that handles your payments, answers any questions you may have, and adjusts your payment plan, if necessary. If you don’t know who your loan servicer is, you can find out by logging into the National Student Loan Data System or calling the Federal Student Aid Information Center at 800-433-3243. 
 
As of 2020 there are 11 federal loan servicers. Nelnet is one of the largest. It acquired Great Lakes Educational Loan Services in 2018, and together the two companies serviced $473 billion of loans for 15.1 million borrowers, as of December 31, 2019.﻿﻿
 
If you’ve been assigned to Nelnet, here’s what you need to know about the loan servicer. 
 
Nelnet was appointed by the Department of Education to service direct loans and Federal Family Education Loans. Currently, Nelnet is under contract with the Department of Education through December 14, 2020. However, there is the potential for extensions at the Department’s discretion that would last through December 14, 2021.﻿﻿
 
Nelnet is primarily known as a federal loan servicer. However, Nelnet is a large company with several segments. Parts of its business offers private education loans and consumer loans. 
 Nelnet offers private student loans and student loan refinancing through a partnership with Union Bank & Trust Company under the brand name U-fi From Nelnet. 
If Nelnet is your assigned loan servicer, you can contact the company about the following topics: 
 
You can make payments in the following ways: 
 
To start making payments online, follow these three simple steps: 
 
To sign up for an account, click on “Register” on the home screen. The site will prompt you to enter the following information: 
 
You will create a security question to verify your identity. 
 
Once your account has been activated, you can select your loan and schedule a payment. While you can make one-time payments if you wish, it’s a good idea to set up automatic payments. When you enroll in autopay, Nelnet will give you a 0.25% interest rate discount. Over time, the discount will allow you to save hundreds of dollars. 
 
If you have more than one student loan with Nelnet, it’s important to understand how your payments are allocated. If you pay more than is due, Nelnet will apply the extra payment to the loan with the highest interest rate. Once that loan is paid off, Nelnet will apply the extra payments toward the loan with the next highest interest rate. If you want to change how payments are applied, you must contact Nelnet and make special payment instructions. 
 
Nelnet was founded in 1996 and is based in Lincoln, Neb. The company has more than 6,500 employees in offices all over the country.
 
Nelnet is one of the largest loan servicers in the country and has been the subject of some controversy. In the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) 2019 Student Loan Ombudsman Report, the CFPB reported that it handled 6,600 federal student loan complaints between Sept. 1, 2018, and Aug. 31, 2019. Approximately 9% of those complaints were about Nelnet, making it one of the most commonly reported companies.﻿﻿
 
Nelnet is currently facing a class-action lawsuit, which was filed in June 2020 by the Domina Law Group on behalf of five student loan borrowers. In the complaint, the borrowers claim that they suffered when their income-driven repayment plan applications were mishandled.﻿﻿
 If you had federal student loans serviced by Nelnet at any period within the previous four years prior to June 2020 or after,  You’re encouraged to contact Domina Law Group. 
You can contact Nelnet’s customer service department by phone by calling 888-486-4722. The call center is open Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. EST. You can also reach customer support by filling out a secure email form on Nelnet’s website.
 
You can mail general correspondence—not your payments—to one of the following two addresses:
 
Residents of California – Nelnet, P.O. Box 82578, Lincoln, NE 68501-2578
 
Residents of All Other States – Nelnet, P.O. Box 82561, Lincoln, NE 68501-2561
 
Finally, you can fax 877-402-5816 or email WrittenRequest@nelnet.net.
 
With federal student loans, you can’t pick your loan servicer; one is assigned to you. If you’re unhappy with the loan servicer you have, there are only three ways to get a new one: 
 
If you want to simplify your loan payments and extend your repayment term but keep your loans in the federal loan system, you can consolidate your debt with a direct consolidation loan. When you consolidate your loans, you can extend your repayment term to up to 30 years, and you’ll get a new loan servicer. 
 
Your loans will be combined into one, and your interest rate on the new loan will be based on the weighted average of your current loans, rounded up to the nearest one-eighth of one percent.﻿﻿
 
If you work for a nonprofit organization or government agency full time, you may be eligible for Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF). If you intend to apply for PSLF, notify Nelnet. Once you do so, the company will transfer your loans to FedLoan Servicing, the designated PSLF loan servicer.﻿﻿
 
If you’re unhappy with your loan servicer and willing to sacrifice federal benefits such as access to income-driven repayment (IDR) plans and loan forgiveness, another approach to consider is student loan refinancing. When you refinance your loans, you consolidate your debt with a private lender. Your new loan has different conditions, including repayment term, interest rate, and minimum monthly payment. If you decide to refinance your loans, check out our list of the best refinancing lenders. 
 As one of the largest federal loan services, Nelnet does have a history of some issues with borrowers. However, you can minimize problems by enrolling in automatic payments, keeping good records, and contacting Nelnet right away if you notice any discrepancies with your account.