
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
If you’re a loyal Nissan or Infiniti driver, you may consider getting the Nissan Visa Signature Card to take advantage of its special financing and rewards. However, there are limitations on what you can do with your rewards, which can make it challenging to cash in on those benefits.
 The Nissan Visa Signature Card is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. High rewards rates on gas and dining Offers some redemption flexibility with cash back Special financing for eligible large purchases Low cash-back redemption rate Low base rewards rate Special financing isn’t automatic 
The Nissan Visa Signature Card may be worth considering if you’re a loyal Nissan or Infiniti customer and you regularly replace, service, or accessorize your vehicles at the dealership. The card’s high rewards rates on Nissan and Infiniti purchases and on gas can provide a lot of value in that case.
 
However, if you use the card to get cash back, you’ll reduce your rewards rate by half—that means 2.5% cash back on gas and at Nissan and Infiniti purchases, 1.5% back on dining, and 0.5% back on everything else. With that in mind, you’ll get a lot more value with other cash-back rewards cards. 
 
This card may also be worth considering for its special financing. But because of the limitations and lack of a guarantee that you’ll actually qualify, you may be better off with a 0% APR credit card instead.
 
The Nissan Visa Signature Card offers 5 points per dollar at Nissan and Infiniti dealers, and on gas, 3 points per dollar on dining, and 1 point per dollar on everything else. Once you’ve earned points with the card, they’ll be posted to your account within 30 days.
 
Note, however, that if you take advantage of the card’s special financing, you won’t get rewards points on those purchases. 
 
There are two ways to redeem your rewards with this card. The more flexible option—but also the less valuable one—is cash back in the form of a statement credit. If you do this, your points are worth half a cent apiece, and you can only get up to $300 annually with this redemption option.
 
The better option is if you use your points to get a discount with Nissan or Infiniti. Points are worth one cent each when redeemed that way, and eligible redemptions include:
 
Although you will get more value with this option, you’ll most likely have fewer opportunities to use your rewards this way. Even if you lease your vehicle, you probably only swap your car for a new one every few years. And while getting your vehicle serviced occurs more often, it’s still not as flexible as the option to redeem your rewards for cash back, which you can use anytime and for anything.
 
The best way to maximize your rewards is to use them only for the Nissan and Infiniti purchases that qualify for the one-cent-per-point redemption rate. Also, if you have multiple credit cards, make sure to use this one for its bonus categories if that earning rate exceeds what you’d get from your other cards. Because the card’s base rewards rate is just 1 point per dollar, it may be a good idea to pair it with a card that earns a higher rate on all of your other purchases to maximize your rewards overall. 
 
Synchrony Bank, which issues the Nissan Visa Signature Card, ranked tenth out of 11 national card issuers in J.D. Power’s 2019 U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study. The only national card issuer with a lower customer satisfaction score was Credit One Bank.
