
Like most large retail stores, Nordstrom offers a store-brand credit card with benefits beyond those available in its rewards program.
 
The most basic option is the Nordstrom retail credit card, which can only be used at one of the Nordstrom-brand locations, including Trunk Club and HauteLook . The other credit card options are the Visa Platinum and Visa Signature cards. These cards have the same benefits as the basic retail card but with the added feature of having Visa credit card capabilities to use anywhere Visa is accepted.﻿﻿
 
For shoppers who do not want a credit card, Nordstrom offers a debit card option that gives the same benefits as the credit card but directly debits the customer's personal checking account.﻿﻿
 
Nordstrom has a rewards program called The Nordy Club that's independent of its credit and debit card program. It's free to join, and anyone can sign up for it online with a name, phone number, and email address.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
A Nordy Club member can earn one point for every dollar spent online or in stores, and their points earn them special statuses that unlock new benefits. They also get access to beauty and style workshops, curbside pickup of purchases, and first access to shop select brands.﻿﻿
 
Nordstrom also offers members bonus-point events that occur during special times of the year. For example, the company hosts a triple points event every few months, during which members receive three times the amount of points they usually receive for every dollar spent.﻿﻿
 
Credit and debit cardholders receive additional benefits from the Nordy Club program. Credit cardholders receive triple the reward points when using their cards, or three points for every dollar spent. Debit cardholders get two points for every dollar spent.﻿﻿
 
Cardholders also receive a $40 bonus for using their Nordstrom card on the day they're approved and automatically earn $100 in alterations benefits. In addition, cardholders get early Access to Nordstrom's annual Anniversary Sale.﻿﻿
 
Signing up for a card is simple, either on the Nordstrom website or in person at one of the many locations. An applicant must provide personal information such as name, address, and phone number.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
In addition, applicants must provide secure personal information, including Social Security number, date of birth, employer, annual income, and driver’s license number. The company uses the information to check an applicant’s credit and background to ensure they qualify.
 
When signing up online, the decision is instant, and qualified applicants can begin shopping immediately.
 
The Nordstrom credit or debit card is a wise choice for the frequent Nordstrom shopper and Nordy Club member. There are four levels for card users, based on annual spending of $0 to $499; $500 to $1,999; $2,000 to $4,999; and $5,000 and more. All four levels provide the basic benefits, but the higher levels offer additional benefits.﻿﻿
 
Members in level two and above get invited to a special private holiday shopping party. Those in levels three and four enjoy the Extraordinary Experiences package, in which Nordstrom spoils its top clientele twice per year. Level four customers receive VIP access to in-store events and early access to anniversary sales.
 Nordstrom. "Apply for a Nordstrom credit card." Accessed May 29, 2020. Nordstrom. "The Nordy Club." Accessed May 29, 2020. Nordstrom. "FAQs." Accessed May 29, 2020. Facebook–Nordstrom. "The Triple Points Event Starts Today!" Accessed May 29, 2020. Nordstrom. "Create Account." Accessed May 29, 2020. Nordstrom. "Nordy Club Status." Accessed May 29, 2020.