
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Norwegian Reward World Mastercard offers 2% rewards on purchases from Norwegian Air and for dining and groceries. There’s a one-time offer of $50 and another of $100 for spending $20,000 a year, both delivered in points. The card has no annual fee.
 Earn $50 in CashPoints that can be used for future travel when you open an account and spend $500 in the first 90 days. The Norwegian Reward World Mastercard is not one of our top-rated airline credit cards. You can review our list of the best airline credit cards for what we think are better options. Easily earned one-time offer $100 anniversary bonus for high spending Priority boarding Relatively low rewards on Norwegian purchases Rewards must be redeemed with Norwegian 
The Norwegian Reward World Mastercard best suits those who want a card whose rewards are exclusively used to earn Norwegian Air flights. While the card 2% rewards can be earned on dining and grocery spending, as well as on Norwegian Air purchases, they can be redeemed only on Norwegian Air. Obtaining the card might also be a simple additional transaction to those who are booking a Norwegian Air flight.It’s not uncommon for airlines to provide richer offers on their flight checkout page. For example, on 6/10/2020 we received an offer for a $50 statement credit + $50 in CashPoints for opening an account and using our new card to complete the booking in process. Finally, the Norwegian Reward World Mastercard charges no foreign-transaction fees, and so would be a good acquisition for those who travel abroad and have no other card in their wallet that omits these fees. And even occasional Norwegian Air travelers may enjoy free priority boarding, which is the card’s main benefit. 
 
You receive $50 in CashPoints if you spend $500 with the Norwegian Reward World Mastercard in the first 90 days. That spending requirement is waived, and the points awarded more immediately, if you open a card account at the same time you buy a Norwegian Air ticket. Your CashPoints can only be used to redeem for airfare on Norwegian Air. 
 
The Norwegian Reward World Mastercard has a rewards earning of 2% on Norwegian Air purchases, as well as eligible dining and grocery purchases. Rewards are earned as CashPoints. So, for every $100 spent on eligible purchases, you would receive $2 in CashPoints.
 
All other purchases receive 1% in rewards or $1 in CashPoints for every $100 spent on eligible purchases.
 
Norwegian CashPoints normally expire in 24 months. Owners of the Norwegian Reward World Mastercard get twice as long—48 months—before points are removed from their CashPoints account.
 
The CashPoints you earn with this card can be redeemed only for purchases from Norwegian Air. Redemption involves logging into your Norwegian Air account and choosing the flight itinerary you prefer. You can then choose to pay with your CashPoints, as long as your account is in good standing. It’s possible to redeem with no minimum requirement and there are no blackout dates or destination limitations.
 
The Norwegian Reward World Mastercard doesn’t offer a way to transfer to other partners. Instead, redemption is limited to booking flights via the Norwegian Air website.
 
As with most airline cards, you earn the highest rewards rate with Norwegian Reward World Mastercard for purchases from the airline itself. What’s uncharacteristic about the card is that that same highest rate applies to purchases in some other categories, too. As a result, you can as effectively maximize your earnings with the Norwegian Reward World Mastercard through buying groceries or restaurant meals as you can by charging tickets on Norwegian. 
 
In 2018, the average consumer spent $7,923 on food, including dining out and eating at home. Charged to the Norwegian Reward World Mastercard, those average purchases would earn you $158 in CashPoints to use to buy Norwegian Air tickets. You could supplement those rewards with those from buying Norwegian Air tickets. Even if you don’t make any air purchases, though, you could use the Norwegian Reward World Mastercard for miscellaneous purchases, which earn 1% rewards. Let’s say you supplemented the approximately $8,000 a year in groceries and dining spending noted above with about $1,000 a month in miscellaneous spending. If you indeed did reach $20,000 in annual spending, you’d earn the bonus of $100 in CashPoints. That extra reward would be on top of the $158 for the food spending and $120 for the miscellaneous spending. The grand total of rewards would be $378, for $20,000 in spending. That represents a decent rewards rate of 1.9 cents per dollar spent.    
