
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
For people who buy a lot of their clothing at Old Navy and other Gap Inc. brand stores, the Old Navy Visa could be a good fit. It offers 30% off their first purchase on the Old Navy website and 5 points for each dollar spent at Gap Inc. brand stores.
 Open a new Old Navy card online to receive a 30% off your first Old Navy purchase made within 90 days of account opening. The Old Navy Visa is not one of our top rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Discount on first Old Navy purchase No annual fee 60-day shopping pass Exclusive offers Rewards can only be used at certain stores Foreign transaction fee High regular APR 
The Old Navy Visa card is designed for people who shop at stores falling under the Gap Inc. brand, in particular Old Navy. It’s possible to earn extra points for purchases at Gap, Banana Republic, and Athleta stores. 
 
Because rewards can only be redeemed for Gap Inc. purchases, this card would not be ideal for people who do most of their clothes shopping at other retailers. 
 
This credit card doesn’t come with a one-time offer in terms of points. Instead, it offers 30% off the first purchase you make with the card at OldNavy.com. After being accepted for the card, if you’re eligible for the offer, you’ll be sent a one-time discount code that you can enter at checkout.
 
There’s also a 60-day shopping pass. It provides a 10% discount on qualifying purchases made during the first 60 days that you’re a cardholder.
 
Earning rewards with the Old Navy Visa card is fairly straightforward. Cardholders receive 5 points for every dollar spent with Gap Inc. brands, whether in store or online. All other purchases made with this card earn 1 point per dollar. 
 
There are other ways to earn extra points, such as entering an email address or signing up for paperless statements. 
 
Rewards can be redeemed when you receive 500 points—a value of $5. That makes each point worth one cent.
 
You can redeem rewards by using a code online or on your phone, or by presenting the reward in the store. Rewards are only redeemed on purchases charged to the Old Navy Visa card account. Also, it’s only possible to redeem up to three rewards on a single transaction in store and only five online. 
 
There is no way to transfer points to other programs. However, it’s possible to use your rewards from the Old Navy card on purchases with other Gap Inc. brands. 
 
The best way to maximize rewards with the Old Navy Visa is to use it to make as many of your clothing purchases as possible at Old Navy and other Gap Inc. brands. 
 
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average consumer spent $1,866 on clothing in 2018. So if you bought all that clothing using the Old Navy Visa card with Gap Inc. brands, you’d earn 9,330 points—translating to $93.30 in rewards that you could use toward future clothing purchases.
