
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
A personal loan from OneMain Financial may be worth considering if you need to borrow money but a poor credit score is keeping you from qualifying with other lenders. The community-based lender, which has been in business for more than 100 years, offers personal loans up to $20,000. However, before you apply you should be aware that the cost of a personal loan from OneMain Financial can be on the steep side. Annual percentage rates (APRs) range from 18% to 35.99%, and you may face an origination fee as high as 10%. 
 Good credit not required to qualify Numerous branches Find out if you prequalify with a soft credit pull High starting APR compared with some subprime lenders Maximum loan amount of $20,000 May charge high origination fees and late fees in addition to other costs 
Borrowers who cannot afford to keep up with their payments due to COVID-19 can call a branch during business hours to discuss potential solutions. ﻿﻿
 
OneMain Financial issues personal loans to borrowers for a number of different purposes. While you cannot apply your loan proceeds toward post-secondary education or business expenses, you can use the money you borrow for any of the following reasons (and perhaps more):﻿﻿ 
 
Additionally, the lender also offers auto loans for purchases, refinances, and repairs. 
 
Once you’re approved for a personal loan, you could potentially pick up your funds by check as soon as the same day. If you opt to receive your funds by Automated Clearing House (ACH) instead, you may need to wait an extra one to two business days, based on the time of your loan closing. ﻿﻿
 
Although OneMain has high rates and fees, some of their appealing features include soft initial credit inquiry, joint applications, free VantageScore credit score, and rewards. Here is how each works:
 
You can check to see if you are prequalified for a personal loan with OneMain Financial online. The initial credit inquiry when you check for prequalified offers will be soft. A soft credit inquiry means that your credit score will not impacted negatively in any way. However, if you move forward and officially apply for financing, a full hard credit inquiry—which can impact your credit score—will take place at that time. 
 
For borrowers who want to add a cosigner, OneMain Financial does allow joint personal loan applications. The lender reveals that you may be able to qualify for a larger loan amount when you apply with a co-borrower. Before you cosign for a loan (or have someone cosign on your behalf), it’s important to understand that doing so can be risky. If the primary borrower fails to pay the loan back as agreed, both applicants will be equally liable for the debt. Additionally, both the borrower and co-borrower may experience credit score damage that could make it difficult to qualify for future financing. ﻿﻿
 
OneMain customers can log in to their accounts to receive a free copy of their VantageScore credit score once a quarter. The benefit is limited to primary borrowers, not cosigners.﻿﻿
 
With OneMain Rewards, borrowers can earn rewards in a variety of ways, including when you:﻿﻿
 
Once you have enough points, you can redeem them for benefits like movie tickets, dining, Amazon gift cards, and more. 
 
Here’s a look at what to expect when you apply for a personal loan with OneMain Financial: ﻿﻿
 
OneMain Financial has published a number of educational articles about the potential value of refinancing loans, including personal loans. However, the lender isn’t clear about whether it will allow you to refinance an existing OneMain loan or lower your monthly payment. Instead, customers are asked to contact their local branches for more information about whether or not they may qualify for lower payments. ﻿﻿
 Borrowers with good credit, and especially those with excellent credit, may be able to qualify for a more attractive personal loan elsewhere. However, if you have credit problems and you haven’t been able to prequalify for a personal loan elsewhere, OneMain Financial may be worth considering even with their high APRs.  Keep in mind that you should still shop around for the best personal loans for bad credit before you agree to any financing offer. OneMain charges high fees compared to many other lenders, which is something to remember when comparing rates and terms between multiple lenders. If you reside in a state where OneMain isn't available, you'll have to look elsewhere. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 OneMain Financial. “Personal Loans.” Accessed May 19, 2020.  OneMain Financial. “Find Out If You are Prequalified.” Accessed May 19, 2020.  OneMain Financial. “Loan Fees.” Accessed May 19, 2020. 