
At one time, annuities may have looked like an ideal retirement vehicle: You put in a lump or periodic sum, the principal is guaranteed with an insurance benefit, and the headline in the brochure claims you’ll receive $4,000 a month for life—which, along with Social Security, seems like a reasonable amount to live on in your later years. However, annuities have somewhat lost their glow. There are several reasons for this, including:
 
Every retirement vehicle (to be fair to annuities) has become less certain due to the generally lower-returning mutual funds underpinning most of them. Annuities are no exception, and they are subject to uncertainty brought on by such things as stock market volatility.
 
For people absolutely disinterested in managing their own finances, annuities offer a simple menu. The participant must make only three decisions: lump or periodic inputs (contributions), deferred or immediate income, and fixed or variable returns. Many investors have chosen variable annuities over fixed ones at times, usually when roaring mutual funds meant high returns compared to the conservative and seemingly safe fixed option.
 
In the fine print, “fixed” usually means the returns will be re-evaluated in one to five years due to market variances.﻿﻿  Contracts simply can’t guarantee 6% if the fund manager is only making all-in yields of 5%.
 
The old joke about annuities is that you make a fortune on the headline, and then the fine print takes it all back. In many cases, this hasn’t been too far from the truth. Introductory rates on car loans could be 0% interest and are indeed much like loss leaders in a supermarket promo. But those large promises suddenly evaporate after the first six months or year, when rates are adjusted, and fees kick in.
 
Here are a few of the fees that can be buried deep within an annuities contract—or not shown at all:
 If you want to transfer funds to another insurance company without penalty, let your accountant handle the transaction—receiving the check yourself could cause trouble. 
After all the downsides and hidden costs, there are still a few upsides:
 
After considering all the pros and cons, it’s important to remember that your entire investment in an annuity—or much of it—can be lost if the company behind the contract isn’t sound.
 
There are some state protections for some annuity funds, but they are limited (and worth researching for your state). You can buy annuities below your state's protection limit from several companies, for example, instead of buying just one larger annuity from a single company. But if you move from a state with a high limit to one with a lower limit, your new state's level will generally apply should the annuity fail after you move.
 
Low fees and high-quality writers increase the safety of your contribution and your chance of long-term happiness with your annuity.
 National Association of Insurance Commissioners. "Buyer's Guide for Deferred Annuities: Fixed," Page 3. Accessed May 31, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Variable Annuities: What You Should Know: Variable Annuity Charges." Accessed May 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Topic No. 410 Pensions and Annuities." Accessed May 31, 2020. House Committee on Ways and Means. "The Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement Act of 2019 (The SECURE Act): Title 1: Expanding and Preserving Retirement Savings." Accessed May 31, 2020.