
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Payoff is an online, personal loan platform that connects lenders with borrowers who are looking to consolidate and pay off high-interest credit card debt. If you qualify, the company offers personal loans up to $40,000 with competitive rates for borrowers with good credit.
 
Here's everything you need to know about Payoff's personal loans before applying.
 Competitive APR Pre-qualify with a soft credit pull No prepayment or late payment fees Customer service Limited uses for funds Tougher to qualify for No joint applicants Takes longer to receive funds 
Payoff offers one fixed interest rate personal loan for credit card debt consolidation.﻿﻿
 
After submitting an application and all the necessary documents, underwriting may take three to seven business days. After getting approved and signing the paperwork, you will receive the funds within three to six business days, according to a representative.
 
Payoff has a quick online application process. The application offers the chance to check rates with a soft pull on your credit. This part of the application won’t impact your credit score. You can check your rate by entering the following details:
 
You can’t include income from other members of your household. Payoff won’t allow alimony, child support, or separate maintenance payments to qualify. It also wants to know if your income is commission only.
 
The last step before checking your rate is creating an account with an email address and password. You will have to review and accept Payoff’s terms of service and authorizations.
 
Once you accept an offer and apply, Payoff will conduct a hard inquiry on your credit—which will temporarily lower your credit score. During the underwriting process, Payoff may ask for more information, including:﻿﻿
 
You can upload each of these documents to your account and must be at least 18 years old, have a Social Security number, and valid checking account to qualify.﻿﻿
 
If you’re looking to lower your APR, you will have to apply for another personal loan elsewhere. Payoff doesn’t offer the ability to refinance, according to a representative.
 Payoff may be a good option if you have good to excellent credit and you’re eager to pay off high-interest credit card debt. The company offers competitive APRs, which include the origination fee, and does not charge other fees. It also provides proactive customer support during the first year of the loan. Plus, applicants can find out what rates they qualify for without affecting their credit score. However, if you're looking for a personal loan for reasons other than debt consolidation or you reside in one of the states where Payoff isn't available, then the lender isn't for you. That, and the high minimum loan amount may be a turnoff for some. You should always shop around before applying for a personal loan, though. With good to excellent credit, you may qualify for several other personal loan options. The difference in APRs and fees could have a big impact on your bottom line. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
