
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
As a peer-to-peer lending platform, Peerform connects borrowers who need money with investors who have money to lend. After you’re approved, you’ll be set up with an investor who will fund your personal loan for a variety of purposes, including debt consolidation, moving and relocation, home improvement, medical expenses, and more.﻿﻿
 
Peerform is an option for those with poor or fair credit. Borrowers need at least a 600 credit score to qualify for a personal loan of up to $25,000. Read on to determine if a Peerform personal loan is right for you.
 Low Qualifying Credit Threshold Low Interest Rates Semi-Flexible Repayment Dates High Fees No Cosigner Option High Minimum Loan Amount 
Borrowers can contact Peerform to explore payment options if they're affected financially by COVID-19. Borrowers may be able to reapply for a second loan.
 
According to a representative, the timeline varies and there's no known estimate. It could take you anywhere up to a couple of weeks to receive your loan.
 
You can check to see if you’re eligible for a Peerform loan without applying for one first. During prequalification, enter how much money you’d like to borrow and the purpose of your loan, such as home improvement or debt consolidation. From there you’ll need to:
 
Once your account is created, you’ll receive a few loan options. Your loan request will then go into the Peerform marketplace for investors to review. You’ll need to prove your identity with at least one form of ID, such as a driver’s license.
 
Peerform doesn’t offer refinancing options at this time.
 For borrowers who don’t have much credit to their name or don’t have a strong credit score at the moment, a Peerform loan might work well. The minimum credit score and low credit threshold allow those with poor or fair credit to qualify, even though cosigners and joint applications aren’t available. The low interest rates mean that even if you don’t have the best score, you may not face sky-high rates. Nevertheless, the fees add up. Between origination fees and charging money to process a check, you could end up paying a lot more than your principal amount. Not having a cosigner option can also hurt if you have someone offering to help you. If you have a strong credit history and can prove your creditworthiness, look elsewhere to borrow money.