
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Credit card rewards get a lot of fanfare, but for some people a credit card with a low interest rate could provide considerably more value. One example of that is the PenFed Gold Visa Card, which offers a range of APRs that start in the single digits. You’ll also get some decent introductory incentives and the chance to avoid some common credit card fees.
 $100 statement credit when you spend $1,500 in the first 90 days The PenFed Gold Visa Card is not one of Investopedia's top rated credit cards. Here is a list of our best credit cards that we think provide better options. Offers the chance of a low APR Valuable introductory incentives Light on fees No guarantee you’ll get a low interest rate No ongoing rewards No introductory promotion on purchases 
The PenFed Gold Visa Card is best suited for someone who has excellent credit and plans to carry a regular balance on their card. While you’ll still be paying interest, the card could save you money compared to most alternatives. It may also be a decent option to consider as an emergency credit card—especially if you haven’t had a chance to build up an adequate emergency fund.
 
Before you apply, though, you’ll need to become a member of the Pentagon Federal Credit Union. Anyone is eligible to join.
 
Once your account has been opened, you’ll receive a $100 statement credit after you spend $1,500 in the first 90 days. That’s roughly a 7% return on your spending during that time, which isn’t impressive by any means in today's credit card market. 
 
However, considering that the card doesn’t offer ongoing rewards, it’s still a nice perk. In most cases, cards that don’t offer rewards have no one-time offer at all.
 
Make sure you spend enough to reach the minimum spending requirement for the welcome offer. Broken down, you’ll need to spend an average of $500 a month to make it happen. Also, note that cash advances, balance transfers, and credit card checks don’t count toward that $1,500 requirement.
