
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
PenFed Credit Union was formed in 1935. It is formally known as the Pentagon Federal Credit Union, and its headquarters are in McLean, Va. Originally, membership was limited to those with ties to the military or the federal government. Now that this credit union has an open charter, anyone may join.
 
There are now more than 1.9 million members of PenFed Credit Union with more than $25 billion in assets. Members have access to 48 branches throughout the U.S. and on military bases in Guam, Japan, and Puerto Rico.
 High-yield checking account with easy-to-waive monthly fees Online savings account with a competitive dividend rate Low minimum deposit to open checking and savings accounts Limited number of branches Does not reimburse ATM fees charged by other banks Stiff penalties for early withdrawal from money market certificates 
PenFed Credit Union is best for consumers who want high-yield accounts with low minimum deposit requirements and low fees. It may be a good fit if you:
 
PenFed Credit Union offers an array of deposit accounts, loans, and services to meet your needs. Because it is a membership-based credit union, deposit rates tend to be higher than with a traditional bank.
 Although PenFed was historically limited to people with ties to the military and government, membership is now open to all citizens and permanent residents of the U.S. 
PenFed currently offers only one checking account: Access America Checking. This dividend-bearing checking account has two tiers of annual percentage yields (APYs), depending on your daily balance. For balances above $50,000, no dividends are earned.
 
There is a $25 minimum deposit required to open your account. The monthly fee of $10 is waived with a daily balance of $500 or direct deposits totaling at least $500 per month.
 
Members can use more than 68,000 ATMs with no fee. Although PenFed Credit Union has limited ATMs that it owns, the credit union partners with Allpoint, Target, CVS, Walgreens, and more, so that members can use an ATM without being charged. If you use another bank’s ATM, PenFed Credit Union does not charge a fee. However, it will not reimburse you for any fees charged by the owner of that ATM.
 
The Money Market Savings account earns a higher rate of dividends, depending on the amount deposited. There is a minimum opening deposit of $25 and no monthly service fees. Free checks are available upon request, so members have easy access to their funds.
 
PenFed Credit Union has a Regular Savings account and an online-only option. The Regular Savings account can be opened with $5 and has no monthly fees with electronic statements. If you choose paper statements, there is a fee of $1 per month.
 
The Premium Online Savings account is a high-yield savings account with a competitive dividend rate (though it’s not as high as the best rates going) and no monthly fees. There is a $5 minimum to open this account as well.
 
Credit unions use the term “money market certificates” instead of “certificates of deposit (CDs).” PenFed Credit Union has money market certificates ranging from six months to seven years. A minimum deposit of $1,000 is required to open an account.
 
Money market certificates are also available for individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and Coverdell education savings accounts for college. The required minimum deposit for a Coverdell account is reduced to $500.
 
At maturity money market certificates will renew automatically unless you selected the nonrenewal option. When this happens the funds will be automatically deposited into a regular savings account.
 
If you withdraw from the money market certificate prior to maturity, there is a penalty based on the term selected. The penalties seem to be stiffer than what other banks charge for the same term.
 
PenFed has three credit card choices for its members. All three have no annual fee and offer a 12-month 0% balance transfer promotion for new accounts. Members can select from a low annual percentage rate (APR), cash back, or rewards, depending upon their needs.
 
In addition to the deposit products listed above, PenFed Credit Union members also have access to the following products and services:
 
Customer service is available by phone (1-800-247-5626) Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. EST. During the weekends live customer service is available from 8 a.m. to 11 p.m. EST on Saturday and 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. on Sunday.
 
PenFed Credit Union is available by secure messaging online and through its mobile app 24 hours a day. Members can download its mobile app for Apple (4.1 stars, 5,300 ratings) and Android (4.4 stars, 11,389 ratings).﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Because it is a credit union, its deposits are insured by the National Credit Union Association (NCUA) instead of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).
