
A pension pillar is one of five pension formats outlined by the World Bank. The five pillar concept was developed in 2005 and has since been adopted by many economically reforming countries in Central and Eastern Europe.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
The World Bank’s policy five-pillar framework defines a range of design elements to determine the pension system modalities and options that should be considered. There were originally three pillars outlined by the World Bank, along with mandatory individual funded savings. It ranges from a basic, minimal degree of social protection to financial and nonfinancial support from various generations to the elderly.﻿﻿
 
The World Bank's pension pillar policy framework focuses on how best to achieve the core objectives of pension systems—that being the protection against the risk of poverty in old age and smoothing consumption from one’s work life into retirement.﻿﻿
 
By establishing these objectives, the World Bank encourages policymakers to consider broader questions of social protection and social policy, which consider the poverty and vulnerabilities of different income groups. Some of these key questions include:
 
Once these core objectives are identified, one can then identify the mandate of the public pension system, the balance between insurance and adequacy functions, and appropriate system design options.﻿﻿
 
The goal of the five-pillar system is to separate the major objectives of pension and/or retirement plans into the following pillars:
 
Many countries have pension plan systems in place that fit with the objectives of the World Bank's five pillars. Country-specific conditions require a tailored approach that should substantially define what is feasible for each country. So there is no one-size-fits-all approach.
 
The United States has a number of different systems in place. The Social Security system was created in 1935 and is run by the Social Security Administration.﻿﻿ It depends on mandatory contributions from the public. The system provides retirement benefits, as well as disability and survivor benefits. Anyone who made contributions for at least 10 years qualifies. Benefits begin to kick in for people who turn 62 and get larger for anyone who waits to collect them after age 67.﻿﻿
 Since financial and social conditions vary by country, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to pension systems. 
American citizens can also build their retirement accounts by investing in a 401(k), a qualified employer-sponsored retirement plan that allows for tax-deferred contributions from their salaries or wages. Another option is the IRA, an investment account that allows the holder to build retirement savings through tax-free growth or on a tax-deferred basis.﻿﻿
 
In Canada, citizens are able to receive retirement income from two different sources—the Old Age Security (OAS) system and the Canada Pension Plan. The OAS system is a taxable pension made available through tax revenues from the government. Citizens and those who can prove Canadian resident status who are 65 or older qualify. The Canada Pension Plan is just like the U.S. Social Security system, which relies on contributions made by employees.﻿﻿
 
Registered retirement savings plans (RRSPs) give Canadians another avenue through which they can save for retirement. Both employees and employers are able to make contributions on a pre-tax basis. The money in this account grows tax-free until the account holder retires and begins to make withdrawals.﻿﻿
 The World Bank. "Reversal and Reduction, Resolution and Reform," Page 5. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. The World Bank. "The World Bank Pension Conceptual Framework," Page 1. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. The World Bank. "Old-Age Income Support in the 21st Century: An International Perspective on Pension Systems and Reform," Pages 2-3. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. The World Bank. "The World Bank Pension Conceptual Framework," Page 2. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. The World Bank. "The World Bank Pension Conceptual Framework," Pages 2-3. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. Government of Canada. "CPP retirement pension: Overview." Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. The World Bank. "The World Bank Pension Conceptual Framework," Page 3. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Retirement Benefits," Pages 1-4. Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. Government of Canada. "Old Age Security — Overview." Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. Social Security Administration. "The Social Security Act of 1935." Accessed Feb. 18, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Types of Retirement Plans." Accessed Feb. 18, 2020.  Canada Revenue Agency. "Registered Retirement Savings Plan (RRSP)." Accessed Feb. 18, 2020.