
A well-crafted estate plan ensures that a person's assets will be smoothly passed on to his or her chosen beneficiaries, after one passes away. The absence of an estate plan can lead to family conflict, higher tax burdens, and exorbitant probate costs. While a simple will is an essential component to the estate planning process, sophisticated plans should also include the use of one or more trusts.
 
This article outlines the most common types of trusts, coupled with their defining characteristics and benefits.
 
A trust is an account managed by a person or organization, for the benefit of another. A trust contains the following elements:
 
Here are the most common types of trusts:
 
Livings TrustsA living trust is usually created by the grantor, during the grantor's lifetime, through a transfer of property to a trustee. The grantor generally retains the power to change or revoke the trust. But after the grantor dies, this trust becomes irrevocable and may no longer be changed. With these vehicles, trustees must follow the rules delineated in the creation documents, relating to the distribution of property and the payment of taxes.
 
Living trusts offer the following advantages:
 
Living trust have the following limitations:
 
Testamentary TrustsA testamentary trust, sometimes called a "trust under will", is created by a will after the grantor dies. This type of trust can accomplish the following estate planning goals:
 
Irrevocable Life Insurance TrustAn irrevocable life insurance trust (ILIT) is an integral part of a wealthy family's estate plan. The federal government currently affords individuals a $2 million estate tax exemption. But any portion of the estate above that amount may be taxed as high as 45%. So, for estates containing more than the $2 million applicable exclusion, life insurance can be an invaluable tool int the estate planning kit. ILITs provides the grantor a flexible planning approach and a tax savings technique by enabling the exclusion of life insurance proceeds from both the estate of the first spouse to die and from the estate of the surviving spouse.
 
The ILIT is funded with a life insurance policy, where the trust becomes both the owner and the beneficiary of the policy, but the grantor's heirs can remain beneficiaries of the trust itself. For this plan to be valid, the grantor must live three years from the time of the policy transfer, or else the policy proceeds will not be excluded from the grantor's estate.
 
Charitable Remainder TrustA charitable remainder trust (CRT) is an effective estate planning tool available to anyone holding appreciated assets with a low basis, such as stocks or real estate. Funding this trust with appreciated assets lets donors sell the assets without incurring capital gains tax.
 
Qualified Domestic TrustThis special trust lets non-citizen spouses benefit from the marital deduction normally afforded to other married couples.
 
Estate planning is a complex process demanding professional oversight, in order to ensure that your loved ones are cared for after your death. A trusts can go a long way in effectively carrying out your wishes.
 
[Important: A living trust is often referred to as "inter-vivos".]
