
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
A Medicare Advantage Plan, also called a Part C or an MA Plan, may sound enticing. It combines Medicare Part A (hospital insurance), Medicare Part B (medical insurance), and usually Medicare Part D (prescription drug coverage) into one plan.﻿﻿ These plans cover all Medicare services, and some offer extra coverage for vision, hearing, and dental. They are offered by private companies approved by Medicare.
 
Still, while many offer $0 premiums, the devil is in the details. You will find that most have unexpected out-of-pocket expenses when you get sick, and what they pay can differ depending upon your overall health.﻿﻿ Here's a look at some of the disadvantages of Medicare Advantage Plans.
 
If you're older than 65 (or turning 65 in the next three months) and not already getting benefits from Social Security, you have to sign up for Medicare Part A and Part B. It doesn't happen automatically. However, if you already get Social Security benefits, you'll get Medicare Part A and Part B automatically when you first become eligible (you don't need to sign up).﻿﻿
 
There are two main ways to get Medicare coverage:
 
Original Medicare includes Part A (hospital insurance) and Part B (medical insurance). To help pay for things that aren't covered by Medicare, you can opt to buy supplemental insurance known as Medigap (or Medicare Supplement Insurance). These policies are offered by private insurers and cover things that Medicare doesn't, such as copayments, deductibles, and healthcare when you travel abroad.
 
Medigap policies vary, and the most comprehensive coverage is offered through Medigap Type F, which covers all copays and deductibles. But as of Jan. 2, 2020, the two plans that cover deductibles—plans C and F—cannot be sold to new Medigap beneficiaries. Be aware that with Original Medicare and Medigap, you will still need Part D prescription drug coverage, and that if you don't buy it when you first become eligible for it—and are not covered by a drug plan through work or a spouse—you will be charged a lifetime penalty if you try to buy it later.﻿﻿ 
 
A Medicare Advantage Plan is intended to be an all-in-one alternative to Original Medicare. These plans are offered by private insurance companies that contract with Medicare to provide Part A and Part B benefits, and sometimes Part D (prescriptions). Most plans cover benefits that Original Medicare doesn't offer, such as vision, hearing, and dental. You have to sign up for Medicare Part A and Part B before you can enroll in Medicare Advantage Plan.
 
In general, Medicare Advantage Plans do not offer the same level of choice as a Medicare plus Medigap combination. Most plans require you to go to their network of doctors and health providers.﻿﻿ Since Medicare Advantage Plans can’t pick their customers (they must accept any Medicare-eligible participant), they discourage people who are sick by the way they structure their copays and deductibles.
 
Author Wendell Potter explains how many Medicare Advantage enrollees don’t find out about the limitations of their Medicare Advantage plans until they get sick:
 
To see how a Medicare Advantage Plan cherry-picks its patients, carefully review the copays in the summary of benefits for every plan you are considering. To give you an example of the types of copays you may find, here are some details of in-network services from a popular Humana Medicare Advantage Plan in Florida:
 
As this non-exhaustive list of copays demonstrates, out-of-pocket costs will quickly build up over the year if you get sick. The Medicare Advantage Plan may offer a $0 premium, but the out-of-pocket surprises may not be worth those initial savings if you get sick. “The best candidate for Medicare Advantage is someone who's healthy," says Mary Ashkar, senior attorney for the Center for Medicare Advocacy. "We see trouble when someone gets sick."
 
While you can save money with a Medicare Advantage Plan when you are healthy, if you get sick in the middle of the year, you are stuck with whatever costs you incur until you can switch plans during the next open season for Medicare.﻿﻿ At that time, you can switch to an Original Medicare plan with Medigap. If you do, keep in mind that Medigap can may charge you a higher rate than if you had enrolled in a Medigap policy when you first qualified for Medicare.﻿﻿
 
Most Medigap policies are issue-age rated policies or attained-age rated policies. This means that when you sign up later in life, you will pay more per month than if you had started with the Medigap policy at age 65. You may be able to find a policy that has no age rating, but those are rare.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
In 2012, Dr. Brent Schillinger, former president of the Palm Beach County Medical Society, pointed out a host of potential problems he encountered with Medicare Advantage Plans as a physician. Here's how he describes them:
 
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed a $2 trillion coronavirus emergency stimulus package, called the CARES (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security) Act, into law. It expands Medicare's ability to cover treatment and services for those affected by COVID-19. The CARES Act also:
 
For Medicaid, the CARES Act also clarifies that non-expansion states can use the Medicaid program to cover COVID-19-related services for uninsured adults who would have qualified for Medicaid had the state chosen to expand. Other populations with limited Medicaid coverage are also eligible for coverage under this state option.
 
Shop very carefully if you are thinking of using a Medicare Advantage plan. Be sure to read the fine print, and get a comprehensive list of all co-pays and deductibles before choosing one. Also, be sure to find out if all your doctors accept the plan and that all the medications you take (if it's a plan that also wraps in Part D prescription drug coverage) will be covered. If the plan doesn't cover your current physicians, be sure that its doctors are acceptable to you and are taking new patients covered by the plan.
 Medicare.gov. "How do Medicare Advantage Plans work?" Accessed March 28, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Costs for Medicare Advantage Plans." Accessed March 24, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Joining a health or drug plan." Accessed March 24, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Get Started with Medicare." Accessed March 28, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Medicare and You - 2020," Page 70. Accessed March 24, 2020. Wendell Potter. "Medicare Advantage – or DISAdvantage?" Accessed March 24, 2020. Humana. "Humana Medicare Advantage plans." Accessed March 24, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Medicare & You," Page 72. Accessed March 24, 2020. PBS. "How do I know I’m not overpaying for Medigap?" Accessed March 24, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Costs of Medigap policies." Accessed March 24, 2020. Florida Hospital Association. "Physicians United Plan Placed into Receivership." Accessed March 24, 2020.