
A plan administrator is a person or company responsible for managing a retirement fund or a pension plan on behalf of its participants and beneficiaries. The plan administrator is tasked with ensuring the funds are properly collected and distributed to all qualified participants.﻿﻿
 
In terms of fiduciary duty, the plan administrator has a duty to act in the interest of the plan's participants, not the company that employs them. The administrator is usually though not always a third-party contractor, not an employee.﻿﻿
 
A plan administrator may not make investment decisions for a fund but may ensure that money contributed to it is being invested correctly in accordance with its stated goals.
 
In short, the administrator manages the day-to-day operations of a company retirement savings or pension fund plan. More specifically, the plan administrator ensures that the money is being contributed to the fund correctly, that the proper asset allocation decisions are being made, and that payouts are promptly distributed to its beneficiaries.﻿﻿
 
The administrator's core tasks include:
 Most companies prefer to outsource the plan administrator's duties. 
For the sake of simplicity and cost savings, a small employer may elect to keep the company's plan administration duties in-house. However, as the number of employees grows, the task becomes more time-consuming and complex. It becomes worthwhile for the employer to hire a professional to be the plan administrator.
 
In addition, professional plan administrators have knowledge of the laws and regulations that govern retirement savings and pension programs. For example, in Ontario, Canada, pension plans must comply with the Pension Benefits Act (PBA).﻿﻿
 
The fees charged by a plan administrator may be paid by the employer or by the fund participants or may be shared.
 
A company or a plan administrator delegates the responsibilities for investing money in the funds to professional investment companies.
 
A pension plan administrator may delegate some or all responsibilities for the fund to one or more service providers. The service providers may be insurance or trust companies, employees of the administrator, or pension specialists who are tasked with certain aspects of plan management. They may be actuaries, accountants, pension consultants, investment managers, fund custodians, or brokers.
 
These service providers, regardless of whether they are employees of the administrator or third parties, are subject to the same duty of care as the administrator.﻿﻿
 Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. "Title 29: Labor." Accessed Feb. 13, 2020. U.S. Department of Labor. "Meeting your Fiduciary Responsibilities," Pages 1-2. Accessed Feb. 13, 2020. Financial Services Commission of Ontario. "Responsibilities of the Pension Plan Administrator." Accessed Feb. 13, 2020. Government of Ontario. "Pension Benefits Act." Accessed Aug. 19, 2020. U.S. Department of Labor. "Meeting your Fiduciary Responsibilities," Pages 2-3. Accessed Feb. 13, 2020.