
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Platinum Home Warranty  
Platinum Home Warranty is an Arizona-based home warranty company that only offers coverage to homeowners in Arizona. While it’s not the cheapest option for coverage, it’s definitely one that Arizona residents should consider.
 Based on our review of over a dozen home warranty companies, Platinum Home Warranty was not one of the best companies we found. To see other options that may be better, visit our list of the best home warranty companies. Uses in-house service providers for repairs In-house customer service representatives (not a call center) Terms and exclusions are concise—no hidden contract limitations Only available in Arizona Cannot easily talk to customer service representative 24/7 Online claims are not available 
Platinum Home Warranty was founded in 2011 with its headquarters located in Scottsdale, Arizona. This home warranty company exclusively operates in Arizona and prides itself on hiring local service providers rather than using third-party resources. The company also takes phone calls directly through its office instead of using a call center. This business approach has given it an A+ rating with the Better Business Bureau.﻿﻿
 Platinum Home Warranty  
Platinum Home Warranty is an Arizona-based company that provides home warranty plans only to residents in Arizona. The company offers a selection of three plans that provide coverage for major home systems and appliances. In addition, the company offers the option of purchasing coverage for items like septic systems, saltwater pools, and drip and sprinkler systems.
 Platinum Home Warranty also provides coverage for both attached and unattached guest houses. 
Our review looks at warranty plan prices and how they compare to the competition, service fees, payout caps, and more. Read on to see if a Platinum Home Warranty plan is the right choice for you.
 
Platinum Home Warranty has a selection of three plans, all with a trade service fee (TSF) of $75 per claim for each visit. The company does not offer real estate plans for professionals and focuses only on residential contracts. It has a slightly higher average annual cost compared to some of its competitors.
 
*Part of the Platinum Plus coverage upgrade.
 
Platinum Home Warranty also offers coverage on individual items for an extra fee.
 
Guest House: Platinum Home Warranty provides coverage options for guest houses. This additional coverage option is based on the square footage of the unit. The following parameters are considered average for the home warranty industry:
 
Platinum Home Warranty offers a choice of three plans (Bronze, Silver, Gold), as well as optional coverage for things like soft water systems, second garage door openers, and built-in pools/spas. Quotes are provided on the company's website in a straightforward manner.
 
The company charges a $75 trade service fee that is payable upon the service technician's arrival. Platinum Home Warranty also provides coverage for both attached and unattached guest houses.
 
Platinum Home Warranty covers breakdowns for major home systems and appliances. The plan is straightforward and most exclusions are normal for the industry. As an example, smart home systems and low voltage systems are not covered, nor are items like plumbing located outside the house, showerheads, or tub strainers and stoppers. You can learn more about the company’s terms and conditions on its website.
 
Payout caps vary depending on the system or appliance, but overall they are about average for the home warranty industry. For example, there is a repair/replacement limit of $1,500 on electrical systems and a $2,000 repair/replacement limit on HVAC units for each 12-month contract term. There is also a limit of $2,500 for kitchen refrigerators and $1,500 total aggregate for all other covered appliances during the term.
 
Platinum Home Warranty does not specifically state the length of time it takes to respond to repairs and get a technician out. Customers can request expedited service for both emergency and non-emergency repairs. However, if a request is made for a non-emergency repair to be completed on weekends, evenings, or on holidays, customers are responsible for all extra fees, including weekends, nights, and holiday rates.
 
Customers are urged to call 602-733-5000 as soon as they are aware of a problem. Standard business hours are 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday. If you call to make a claim outside of that window, a recorded message will explain how to leave information for your claim.
 Platinum appears to make an effort to resolve customer complaints. 
The BBB rating for Platinum Home Warranty is an A+. The company has a below-average number of complaints. The complaints that have been made typically are about lack of parts availability by service providers and disagreements about whether an issue falls under the guidelines of the policy agreement. The company does appear to make an attempt to work with customers when an issue occurs.﻿﻿ 
 
We compared Platinum Home Warranty with Choice Home Warranty since both companies are available in Arizona. There are also some similarities in plan choices and what they offer, including coverage for plumbing stoppages, built-in microwaves, etc. However, Choice Home Warranty offers two plans and a service fee of $85, while Platinum Home Warranty offers three plans and a service fee of $75.
 
Choice Home Warranty has a lower cost ($500) compared to Platinum Home Warranty ($551)—a better deal based strictly on price. But if you like that the service providers are in-house and that you are dealing with a company that is headquartered in Arizona, Platinum Home Warranty may be a more comfortable fit for you.
