
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Known for its witty commercials and name-your-price tool, Progressive is one of the biggest car insurance companies in the country. In 2019 it was the third largest writer of private passenger auto insurance in terms of direct premiums written.﻿﻿
 
Progressive insures more than 20 million drivers across the country. It offers a wide range of other insurance products, including homeowners, renter’s, traveler, and pet insurance.
 Multiple premium discounts available Rideshare insurance available Gap insurance available Prices vary with purchase method Lower-than-average third-party ranking Discounts not available in all states 
Progressive offers the following auto insurance coverage options:
 
Progressive looks at a number of factors when determining your premiums, including:
 
Depending on your location, you may be eligible for some of the following discounts from Progressive:
 
Progressive car insurance is available in all 50 states, but discounts and coverage options may vary.
 
Progressive connects with customers online, over the phone, and through insurance agents. Its customer service team is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, via secure email or by phone. You can call 888-671-4405.
 
Progressive has an automated chat feature you can use to get answers to common questions. It also has a mobile app for iOS and Android devices. You can use the app to view policy details, make payments, view ID cards, report a claim, and get roadside help.
 
However, Progressive doesn't have the best reputation for its customer satisfaction. As noted above, it ranked 16th out of 23 car insurers in the J.D. Power 2019 U.S. Auto Claims Satisfaction Study. Progressive has an A+ (Superior) rating from AM Best, the credit agency focused on the insurance industry.﻿﻿ A strong rating indicates that a company is able to meet its policy and contractual obligations.
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) releases insurance companies’ complaint ratios every year, a number that reflects that number of complaints they received relative to the companies’ market shares. The NAIC considers a ratio of 1.0 to be the industry average. Anything above 1.0 means that a company received more complaints than is typical for its size, while a ratio below 1.0 means the reverse. For 2019 Progressive’s complaint ratio was 1.66, which is worse than the industry average.﻿﻿
 For the past three years Progressive’s complaint ratios have been worse than the industry average. 
Besides car insurance, Progressive offers a wide range of insurance products, including:
 
You can report a claim through the Progressive mobile app, online at the company’s website, or by calling 800-776-4737. Progressive will connect you with a claim representative to help you through the process. You’ll work with an estimator, who will inspect your vehicle and write an estimate. You can decide if you want to get your repairs fixed or would prefer a direct payment.
 
Your representative will help schedule repairs at any shop you like. If you use a shop within Progressive’s approved network, the repairs are guaranteed for as long as you own or lease your vehicle.
 
You can cancel your policy at any time without paying a cancellation fee, but you must cancel over the phone. To do so, call 800-776-4737.
 
You can get an insurance quote online, over the phone, or through an agent. To get a quote, you need to share your personal information, including your driver’s license number, Social Security number, vehicle information number (VIN), date of birth, and contact information. Progressive will review your driving history and credit report to determine your insurance quote.
 
While Progressive has multiple coverage options and discounts, the company’s pricing is dependent on how you purchase your insurance policy, and it doesn’t have the best reputation for customer service. Before committing to an insurance company, it’s a good idea to shop around and compare quote from multiple insurers.
 If you are looking for a car insurance company that allows you to purchase your policy online without speaking to an agent directly, Progressive may be a good option for you. While Progressive does have agents and phone call centers, it has special online and mobile-only insurance rates, and you can get insurance quotes and purchase policies directly from its website and qualify for multiple discounts. However, those who want more-personalized attention and detailed customer service may find Progressive lacking in those areas. In that case you may be better off with a different insurance company.