
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Prosper is a leader in peer-to-peer lending. The company launched in 2005 and was the first of its kind to offer loans to individuals that companies or people provide. It’s a way for people to invest in people, sometimes known as “social lending” or “crowdlending.”
 
Prosper offers personal loans for debt consolidation, home improvement, weddings, babies, vehicles, and even small businesses.﻿﻿ Read on to see if a Prosper personal loan will work well for you.
 Joint Applications Minimal Credit History Fast Turnaround Many Fees Liimited Repayment Terms 
After you apply and have been approved for a Prosper loan, you’ll set up banking details. You can expect funds within a few days.
 
Once you check your rate and see if you prequalify for a Prosper loan, you’ll be able to complete an application. To qualify, you’ll need:
 
Once you’ve applied, Prosper might contact you for more information about your employer, income, and credit history, if needed. The extra screening process could take a few days to complete before you’re approved for a loan. 
 
Your application goes through to investors who are looking for people to invest in. As Prosper is not a bank—it’s a company or an individual investing in you—there could be a delay in approval. While the application process might give you some preliminary figures, such as an estimated interest rate and repayment terms, lenders have to fund your loan. There’s a chance you could be approved for a Prosper loan, but if lenders don’t agree to the terms, you might not get your loan.
 
Prosper currently doesn’t offer personal loan refinancing.
 As a peer-to-peer lending platform, you can use Prosper to take out a personal loan that’s funded by investors. You need a good credit score to qualify, but you don’t need a long credit history. This is helpful for borrowers who are new to credit and don’t have much to their name. The ability to change your due date to a day that works best for your budget is also helpful to ensure that you never miss a payment. Nevertheless, Prosper might not be the best option. The various fees could be a turnoff. There are other personal loan lenders who don’t charge any fees, so Prosper’s origination, late, and insufficient funds fees can inflate your loan amount. You might save more money by using a lender that doesn’t charge the extra fees.  Because it’s a peer-to-peer lending platform, your loan funds could take longer to come through. If you need your money right away, there are other lenders who approve and deposit funds within a day or a couple of days. Compare lenders to make sure a Prosper loan is right for you before completing your application. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
