
A qualified longevity annuity contract (QLAC) is a type of deferred annuity funded with an investment from a qualified retirement plan or an individual retirement account (IRA). A QLAC annuity provides guaranteed monthly payments until death and is shielded from the downturns of the stock market. As long as the annuity complies with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements, it is exempt from required minimum distribution (RMD) rules until payouts begin after the specified annuity starting date.
 
One of the biggest fears many people have as they grow older is outliving their money. QLACs are a creation of the IRS to address this issue. A QLAC is an investment vehicle that guarantees that funds in a qualified retirement plan, such as a 401(k), a 403(b), or an IRA, can be turned into lifetime income without violating RMD rules for those turning age 72. QLACs allow a spouse or someone else to be a joint annuitant, meaning that both named individuals are covered regardless of how long they live (with some conditions).﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
In effect, QLACs act as longevity insurance. As such, they are a valuable tool in retirement income planning. Under 2020 contribution limits, an individual can spend 25% or $135,000 (whichever is less) of their retirement savings account or IRA to buy a QLAC via a single premium. The longer an individual lives, the longer a QLAC pays out. QLAC income may be deferred until age 85.﻿﻿
 The maximum age to which QLAC funds may be deferred 
QLACs have the added benefit of reducing a person’s RMDs, which IRAs and qualified retirement plans are still subject to, even if an individual does not need the money. This can help keep a retiree in a lower tax bracket, which has the added benefit of helping them avoid a higher Medicare premium.
 
Once a retiree’s QLAC income begins flowing, it could increase their tax liability. However, if managed correctly, any additional tax liability can be minimized if other taxable retirement savings income sources are spent down first.
 
The promised benefit of QLACs can only be achieved if rules set by the IRS are followed.﻿﻿ The annual distribution is based on the value of the account at the end of the preceding year.
 
One option for getting the most out of QLACs is by laddering them, meaning buying several smaller contracts (in the $25,000 range, for example) over several years. Such a strategy is like dollar-cost averaging, which makes sense given that annuity costs can fluctuate along with interest rates.
 
QLAC buyers are often given the option of adding a cost-of-living adjustment to their contract, which indexes the annuity against inflation. Deciding on this depends on life expectancy, as the cost-of-living adjustment will reduce the QLAC’s initial payout.
 
The biggest risk of buying a QLAC is the financial strength of the issuing company. If it goes bankrupt, the QLAC may not be enforceable. QLAC buyers should consider buying more than one from different issuers to limit their risk.
 The biggest risk in buying a QLAC is the financial strength of the issuing company, as they may not be enforceable if the company goes bankrupt. 
Take Shahana, who is 67 and due to retire in three years. She would like to save on tax liabilities from her RMDs. Based on her current retirement account balances, she is due to receive a $7,000 per month RMD from her IRA account once she reaches 72 years old.
 
But Shahana has other plans. She has made investments in other assets, such as stocks, bonds, and real estate, which should provide her with an income stream during retirement. Besides this, she plans to consult on a part-time basis to stay current in her field and earn extra cash. All in all, she expects to lead a retirement lifestyle that is comfortable rather than lavish.
 
To make adequate preparations for her old age, she invests $100,000 in a single premium QLAC account from her IRA savings account that she plans to withdraw when she turns 85. This will set back her RMD withdrawal date by 18 years, but it will add $10,000 to the amount she collects.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Internal Revenue Bulletin: 2014-30: Employee Plans: TD 9673 Longevity Annuity Contracts." Accessed June 19, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Form 1098-Q." Page 2. Accessed June 19, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Form 1098-Q." Page 1 and 2. Accessed June 19, 2020. Federal Register. "Longevity Annuity Contracts." Accessed June 19, 2020.