
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Radisson Rewards Visa offers 3 points per dollar spent on purchases at Radisson properties, a one-time offer of 30,000 points by spending $1,000 in the first 90 days, and the ability to earn award nights for high annual spending. The card doesn’t charge an annual fee.
 Earn 30,000 bonus points after you spend $1,000 on your card within the first 90 days. The Radisson Rewards™ Visa® Card is not one of our top rated hotel credit cards. You can review our list of the best hotel credit cards for what we think are better options. Award nights boost the card’s value One-time offer for modest spending Points are worth only about a half-cent each 
The Radisson Rewards Visa card is best suited to those loyal to Radisson hotels—so much so that they’re prepared to spend fairly heavily on the card, including on non-Radisson purchases as needed. That’s because the card is most lucrative if you spend the average of $850 a month or so that’s required to earn an award night at a Radisson property every year. (You can also spend $1,700 or so a month for a year to earn two nights, or $2,500 a month to earn three.) That spending essentially vaults the value of the card’s rewards from weak to decent or better. This card could also be helpful to those who need a few key travel benefits that not all no-annual-fee cards provide: insurance coverage for rental cards and travel assistance. However, the Radisson Rewards Visa is less than ideal as an international travel companion. It charges foreign-transaction fees, which can be easily avoided with many other cards, including some that charge no annual fee. Also, its certificates for award nights stays are valid only at Radisson properties in the U.S.
 
You can earn a one-time offer of 30,000 bonus points, worth $135 according to our valuation of 0.45 cents per point, for spending $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of opening your account. This bonus falls behind those of other credit cards that offer $200 for spending only $500 within the first three months, but not by much. Once you qualify for the bonus, it takes 6 to 8 weeks for the points to appear in your Radisson Rewards account.
 
The Radisson Rewards Visa earns 3 points per dollar spent on participating Radisson Family of Hotels purchases worldwide. We estimate that those rewards represent an estimated value of about 1.35 cents per dollar spent at Radisson properties, and 0.45 cents on all other purchases.
 
Points expire after 24 months with no activity, but even a single charge to the card qualifies as a use sufficient to preserve your rewards balance. Also, if you cancel the card for at least six months, you may not be able to keep the points in the account.
 
The card’s award night certificates provide an additional rewards opportunity for those prepared to charge five figures a year to the Radisson Rewards Visa. Spending $10,000 entitles you to one certificate at the end of your anniversary year, provided you keep the card, and an additional $10,000 and $20,000 in spending earns you a second and third certificate, respectively. 
 
Certificates can be redeemed for a standard room with double occupancy at Radisson Blu, Radisson, Radisson RED, Park Plaza, Park Inn by Radisson, or Country Inn & Suites by Radisson hotels located in the United States.
 
You can redeem your Radisson Rewards points for award nights, of course. You can also donate points to certain causes or use them to purchase gift cards, prepaid cards, TSA PreCheck and Priority Pass membership, as well as for instant in-hotel awards at Radisson properties, such as payment for movies, dinner, laundry, and more. Most of these options can be completed online using your Radisson Rewards account.
 
Your best option is usually redeeming your points for award nights, which you can do online when you’re logged into your Radisson Rewards account. We estimate points used for these redemptions are worth an average of 0.45 cents each.There are seven categories of hotels. The points requirements range from 9,000 to 70,000 points per night for a standard room, or 13,500 to 105,000 points per night for premium rooms. You can also combine points and cash to pay for rooms.
 
When using points for award nights, there aren’t blackout dates, technically speaking. However, redemptions are subject to availability. 
 
Radisson Rewards points can be transferred to airline frequent-flyer programs, including those of United, Delta, and British Airways. But as with many such programs, the typical redemption rate is fairly dismal: every 10 Radisson points you transfer earn you only a single airline mile. Below are specific transfer examples, illustrating that there are no redemption bonuses regardless of points transferred:
 
You can also choose to earn rewards in your Radisson rewards account in air miles or points, rather than as points. But the transfer ratio is the same meager 10 Radisson points to 1 airline mile (with the exception of one partner, SAS, for which 7 Radisson points are required to earn a single SAS EuroBonus point).
 
When you choose the airline miles option, points will be automatically transferred to an airline program once you reach 10,000 Radisson Rewards points. 
 
Miles may take 4 to 6 weeks to post to your account. Once points are transferred to an airline, they cannot be transferred back to Radisson Rewards. Participating airlines include:
 
Getting the most value from the Radisson Rewards Visa begins with the relatively manageable task of spending $1,000 with the card within your first three months of account opening. That will allow you to earn the 30,000-point one-time offer. After that, spend at least $850 or so a month on the card to enjoy its best rewards—indeed, the card’s earnings are subpar if you don’t do so. That spending level will allow you to earn a night at the end of the year, an extra that should add at least a cent in value to each dollar you spend to reach that level. 
 
Finally, while our estimated value per point is low, even when rewards are redeemed for Radisson stays, you may find better values if you shop around, especially if you’re flexible about where and when you stay. Hotel nightly cash rates can vary depending on property and date.As examples, take two locations of the Country Inn & Suites by Radisson for which we checked the price for a standard room for mid-April 2020. The one at Atlanta Airport North in Georgia was priced at $125.75 per night, including taxes and fees, or it could be booked with 28,000 Radisson Rewards points. That redemption would result in a value of about 0.45 cents per point—which is precisely the average value we calculate.
