
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Radisson Rewards Premier Visa Signature charges a $75 annual fee and offers 10 points per dollar spent on Radisson Family of Hotels purchases and 5 points per dollar spent on other purchases. You can earn a one-time offer of 125,000 points and an annual renewal bonus of 40,000 points, along with up to 3 award nights certificates for high annual spending.
 Earn 125,000 bonus points with $3,000 spend within the first 90 days of account opening. The Radisson Rewards Premier Visa Signature Card is not one of our top-rated hotel credit cards. You can review our list of the best hotel credit cards for what we think are better options. Annual renewal bonus valued at $204 Generous one-time offer for modest spending Competitive rewards on purchases Award nights boost the card’s value Complimentary Gold elite status Confusing application process also considers you for another card 
The Radisson Rewards Premier Visa Signature best suits people prepared to pay an annual fee for a card that allows them to earn rewards worth several times as much when redeemed for stays at Radisson properties. Paying the $75 annual cost of the card entitles you to 40,000 bonus points a year that can be used for one or more award nights at select Radisson hotels. You also enjoy the modest perks that come with Gold status when you stay. It’s an especially good choice for those who want to turn spending, whether at Radisson or elsewhere, into additional rewards to earn stays at Radisson properties. For regular customers of the chain’s locations, the card’s 10-points-per-dollar-spent rewards rate for Radisson spending delivers very solid returns, as does the 5 points per dollar earned on all other purchases. Those willing to make the Radisson Rewards Premier Visa Signature one of their most-used cards can get further value through the award-night certificates awarded for every $10,000 spent within a calendar year. 
 
The Radisson Rewards Premier Visa Signature has a one-time offer. You earn 125,000 bonus points after spending $3,000 on the card within its first 90 days. We value the points you would earn from the bonus at $563, based on our valuation of 0.45 cents per point.
 
These bonus points take six to eight weeks to arrive in your Radisson Rewards account. Also, if you cancel the card within six months of receiving it, you may not be able to keep the points in the account.
 
The Radisson Rewards Premier Visa earns 10 points per dollar spent on participating Radisson Family of Hotels purchases worldwide. All other eligible purchases earn 5 points per dollar spent. We estimate that those rewards represent an estimated value of about 4.5 cents and 2.25 cents per dollar spent, respectively, when redeemed for stays at Radisson properties.
 
Points expire after 24 months with no activity, but even a single charge to the card qualifies as a use sufficient to preserve your rewards balance.
 
The card’s award night certificates provide an additional rewards opportunity for those prepared to charge five figures a year to the Radisson Rewards Premier Visa. Spending $10,000 entitles you to one certificate at the end of your anniversary year, provided you keep the card, and an additional $10,000 and $20,000 in spending earns you a second and third certificate, respectively. Assuming the easily available rooms are worth between $100 and $150 per night, every certificate earned essentially adds a cent to a cent-and-a-half in reward value to every dollar you spend. (The math: $100 in room value divided by $10,000 in spending yields an additional 1 cent in value, $150 divided by $10,000 in spending yields an additional 1.5 cents.)
 
Certificates can be redeemed for a standard room with double occupancy at Radisson Blu, Radisson, Radisson RED, Park Plaza, Park Inn by Radisson, or Country Inn & Suites by Radisson hotels located in the United States.
 
Points earned take six to eight weeks after appearing on your billing statement to arrive in your Radisson Rewards account.
 
You can redeem your Radisson Rewards points for award nights, of course. You can also donate points to certain causes or use them to purchase gift cards, prepaid cards, TSA PreCheck and Priority Pass membership, as well as for instant in-hotel awards at Radisson properties, such as payment for movies, dinner, laundry, and more. Most of these options can be completed online using your Radisson Rewards account.
 
Your best option is usually redeeming your points for award nights, which you can do online when you’re logged into your Radisson Rewards account. We estimate points used for these redemptions are worth an average of 0.45 cents each. There are seven categories of hotels. The points requirements range from 9,000 to 70,000 points per night for a standard room, or 13,500 to 105,000 points per night for premium rooms. You can also combine points and cash to pay for rooms.
 
When using points for award nights, there aren’t blackout dates, technically speaking. However, redemptions are subject to availability.
 
Radisson Rewards points can be transferred to airline frequent-flyer programs, including those of United, Delta, and British Airways. But as with many such programs, the typical redemption rate is fairly dismal. For most carriers, every 10 Radisson points you transfer earn you only a single airline mile. That rate translates into these transfer totals:
 
You can also choose to earn rewards in your Radisson rewards account in air miles or points, rather than as points. But the transfer ratio is the same meager 10 Radisson points to 1 airline mile (with the exception of one partner, SAS, for which 7 Radisson points are required to earn a single SAS EuroBonus point).
 
When you choose the airline miles option, points will be automatically transferred to an airline program once you reach 10,000 Radisson Rewards points. 
 
Miles may take four to six weeks to post to your account. Once points are transferred to an airline, they cannot be transferred back to Radisson Rewards. Participating airlines include:
 
Getting the most value from the Radisson Rewards Premier Signature Visa begins with the relatively manageable task of spending $3,000 with the card within your first three months after opening the account. That will allow you to earn the 125,000-point one-time offer in exchange for the required spending.
 
After that, consider spending at least $850 or so a month on the card to enjoy its best rewards. That spending level will allow you to earn a night at the end of the year, an extra that should add at least a cent in value to each dollar you spend to reach that level. 
