
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Regions provides a range of banking services, from savings and investing accounts to credit cards, mortgages, and loans, including auto, student, and personal. It has locations across the South and Midwest and in Texas. Regions offers personal loans for home improvements, buying a car, paying for a vacation, or covering major expenses. You can use the loan however you wish. Read on to see if a Regions personal loan will work well for you.
 
Your annual percentage rate (APR) is a fixed interest rate based on your FICO score, loan amount, and repayment term. For unsecured loans, you can borrow anywhere from $2,000 to $50,000 depending on how you apply.﻿﻿ If you’re looking for a deposit secured loan, you can get one for as low as $250. Repayment terms range from three to five years, depending on your loan size and, if a secured loan, on your collateral. Good to excellent credit is preferred for unsecured loans.﻿﻿ Depending on your pre-existing relationship with Regions, you might qualify if you have a fair credit score.
 Range of personal loan products Prequalification available Small-dollar loans available Good to excellent credit favored Available in only 15 states Low maximum cap 
You can receive your loan as soon as at the loan closing or as soon as you’re approved and there are no other requirements for you to process your application. Approval usually takes about one business day.
 
Before you apply for a Regions personal loan, first decide which one you like. You can choose between an unsecured personal loan, a secured loan, or a deposit-secured loan. If you only need a small amount of money and already have a Regions account, you may want to choose a deposit-secured loan.
 
However, if you don’t want to use your accounts or vehicles as collateral, an unsecured loan might work for you. You can check your rate before you apply to see if you’re eligible. Remember, you’ll need to live in one of the 15 states where Regions operates.
 
When you apply, you’ll need to fill out some personal and financial details about yourself, such as: 
 
If you’re eligible, you’ll continue on with the application process. If you apply online, you could see approval and get your funds within one business day.
 
Regions doesn’t offer personal loan refinancing at this time.
