
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Rocket Loans is the sister company of Quicken Loans, an online lender based in Detroit and founded in 1985. Rocket Loans offers fast funding and competitive annual percentage rates (APRs). The convenient loan experience, however, has to be balanced against the fact that the company does charge an origination fee. Before deciding on a personal loan, you’ll want to do your own research to determine whether Rocket Loans is the best fit for your borrowing needs. That’s why we’ve reviewed relevant details such as rates, fees, and repayment terms to assist in your final decision.
 
Rocket Loans’ personal loan interest rates range from 7.16% to 29.99%, including the discount for autopay.﻿﻿ You may borrow between $2,000 to $45,000, with repayment terms of 36 or 60 months, but your offer will depend on your credit history and income.﻿﻿ Although you may qualify with a credit score as low as 580, a stronger credit profile may offer lower interest rates.
 Same day funding available Prequalifiction option Rate discount if opting into autopay Individual applications only Charges an origination fee Limited repayment terms 
You are able to use Rocket Loans personal loans for most purposes. Reasons include auto repairs, vacation expenses, medical bills, debt consolidation, and home improvement projects. However, you may not use loan proceeds as a student loan or for illegal activities.
 
You can receive your loan proceeds within the same day of approval if you meet certain requirements.
 
Rocket Loans will disburse loan proceeds via an ACH transfer on the same day you’re approved if you complete the entire loan process and sign the promissory note on a business day by 1 p.m. ET. 
 
Rocket Loans offers a 0.03% autopay discount for borrowers who want to set up automatic payments. 
 
You won’t be charged extra for making extra payments or paying off the remaining balance of your loan. That means there is the potential to save money on interest charges when paying more than the minimum due.
 
The entire loan process can only be completed online and is available to U.S. citizens or permanent residents who are at least 18 years old (Alabama and Nebraska residents need to be at least 19 years old). When applying online, here’s what you can expect during the application process: 
 
Once approved, you should receive funds within the same business day if you signed your documents by 1 p.m. EST. 
 
Rocket Loans does not allow refinancing with its personal loans.
