
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  Sallie Mae 
Our Take
 
Sallie Mae is one of the largest private student loan lenders in the industry. If you’re a borrower who has struggled to qualify for loans elsewhere, Sallie Mae may be an option for you. The lender offers undergraduate, graduate, career training, MBA, medical school, and dental school loans. It also lends to borrowers that are often ineligible for student loans from other lenders, such as DACA students or foreign residents, making it a useful resource.
 Loans available to often-neglected groups, including part-time students and non-U.S. citizens Death and disability discharge available Cosigner release possible after just 12 months Late fees apply Prequalification not available  Sallie Mae 
While the federal government remains the largest source of student loans in the U.S., working with a private lender can be a smart decision. And Sallie Mae Bank, a publicly traded company, is reportedly the biggest in the business. It allows undergraduate, graduate, and even vocational students—and their parents—to borrow up to the total cost of their college costs and have up to 15 years to repay the loan.
 
However, Sallie Mae loans do have their drawbacks. Here’s what you need to know about Sallie Mae, so you can make an informed decision.
 
Sallie Mae offers a wide range of student loans, including professional loans, residency loans, and bar exam loans. 
 
If you're a dependent undergraduate student—meaning you depend on your parents at least partially for financial assistance—then the most you can take out in federal direct subsidized and direct unsubsidized loans per year is $5,500. 
 
You’ll likely need more than that to cover your tuition and room and board, so Sallie Mae's undergraduate student loans can help fill the gap. You can borrow up to the total cost of attendance, and there are no origination fees or prepayment penalties.﻿﻿
 
If you’re going to school for professional training or to get a certificate in a trade—such as culinary school or technical school— you can get financing through Sallie Mae's Career Training Smart Option Student Loan. You can borrow up to the total cost of attendance, even covering expenses such as a laptop and meals, and there are no origination fees or prepayment penalties.﻿﻿ 
 
If you're pursuing a master's degree, Sallie Mae’s graduate school loans can be a smart alternative to federal Grad PLUS loans. Grad PLUS loans have high interest rates—7.08% as of 2020. They also have high disbursement fees: 4.236% for loans disbursed before Oct. 1, 2020.
 
Sallie Mae's graduate school loans have no origination fees, and the repayment term is 15 years in length.﻿﻿
 
An MBA loan from Sallie Mae is targeted toward those attending business school, in pursuit of a master's degree in business administration. It can cover up to 100% of your school-certified expenses, and, after you graduate, it offers a six-month grace period and up to 48 months of deferment during an internship.﻿﻿
 
Dental and medical school loans from Sallie Mae have a loan term of 20 years, giving you more time to repay the loan and a more affordable monthly payment. There is a 36-month grace period during the start of your career, and you can borrow up to the total cost of attendance of your program.
 
Sallie Mae’s medical residency and relocation loans can be used to cover the costs of your board examination fees, travel, and moving expenses. You can borrow up to $30,000, and there are no origination fees or prepayment penalties.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ 
 
For law school students, you can borrow up to the total cost of attendance with Sallie Mae's law school loans. The loans have a nine-month grace period and offer a 48-month deferment during your clerkship or fellowship. There are no origination fees and no prepayment penalties.﻿﻿
 
While you study for the bar exam, you can use a Sallie Mae bar exam loan to cover your fees and living costs. You can borrow up to $15,000 and have 15 years to repay the loan.﻿﻿ 
 
Federal PLUS loans have the highest interest rates and disbursement fees of any federal loan. As of 2020, the interest rate on Parent PLUS loans is 7.08%,﻿﻿ so opting for a private loan from a lender such as Sallie Mae may be a cost-effective alternative—if your financials qualify you for the lowest rates.
 
You can borrow up to the total cost of attendance at your child's program. And while Parent PLUS loans are only available to parents of undergraduate students, Sallie Mae parent student loans can be taken out to pay for your child's undergraduate, graduate, or certificate degree.﻿﻿ 
 
To qualify for a student loan from Sallie Mae, you must meet the following requirements: 
 
Unfortunately, Sallie Mae does not offer loan prequalification. To find out if you'd qualify for a loan and to see what rate you'd get, you have to fill out a full loan application and undergo a hard credit inquiry. 
 
Sallie Mae doesn't charge origination fees or prepayment penalties. However, there is a late fee if you miss a payment, 5% of the missed payment amount, up to a maximum of $25. If a payment is returned to you, there is a $20 returned check fee. 
 
If you sign up for automatic payments, Sallie Mae will reduce your interest rate by 0.25%. 
 
Aside from the standard principal-and-interest repayment method, in which you pay both principal and interest right away, even when you're in school, Sallie Mae has three other repayment options:﻿﻿
 
Other student loans, such as residency loans and bar exam loans, don’t require you to make payments while you’re enrolled at least half-time and during your grace period. 
 
Sallie Mae does offer some extra benefits to borrowers. You’ll get four free months (worth $100) of Chegg Study, an online tutoring program that offers study support for any subject and hundreds of textbooks.﻿﻿ You also get free access to your FICO score, which is updated quarterly. You can view your score when you log into your account. 
 If you opt for in-school repayment, you can lower your interest rate 
Sallie Mae doesn’t require you to have a co-signer. However, it strongly recommends that you add one to your application. According to the company, students are nearly four times more likely to be approved with a co-signer than if they applied on their own. As noted above, Sallie Mae does allow you to apply to have your co-signer removed after a year.
 While cosigners aren’t required, they can help your chances of getting a loan. According to Sallie Mae, students are nearly four times more likely to get approved for a loan if they have a cosigner than if they applied on their own. 
If you’re having trouble affording your payments, Sallie Mae may be able to offer you forbearance. You could temporarily postpone your payments for up to three months at a time, for up to 12 months over the life of your loan. 
 
Sallie Mae will discharge any loan if the student dies or becomes completely and permanently disabled. 
 
The time between loan approval and loan disbursement can be lengthy. Once your loan is approved, Sallie Mae will send a certification request to your school. Many schools only certify requests 30 days before enrollment begins. Even if you applied for a loan months in advance, you may not hear back about the funds you need until a few weeks before school begins.
 
Once the school certifies the request, Sallie Mae will disburse the funds directly to the school. Any extra money that’s left over, known as a student loan refund, will be issued to you. 
 
No, Sallie Mae does not offer student loan refinancing. If you want to refinance your loans, check out the best student loan refinance companies. 
 
Sallie Mae is its own loan servicer. The Annual Report of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Private Education Loan Ombudsman does not include Sallie Mae in its roundup of complaints about private student loan lenders.﻿﻿ On Trustpilot.com, Sallie Mae has just a few reviews and a 2.6 TrustScore (out of a possible 6).﻿﻿ Complaints center on loan terms and customer service.
 
Customer support is available by calling 855-756-5626. Support staff is available during the available times: 
 
Customer service is also available via chat. We used this feature to ask a few questions about borrower eligibility and loan terms and found the agents to be very responsive and knowledgeable. We had answers to our questions within minutes. 
 
Before applying for any private student loan, make sure you complete and submit the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The FAFSA is what the government and most schools use to determine what financial aid you’re eligible for, including grants and federal student loans. 
 
If you still need money to pay for school, you can then apply for a Sallie Mae student loan. To complete the online application, you’ll have to enter the following details about yourself:﻿﻿ 
 
Once you submit your application, you could receive your results in as little as 15 minutes. 
 
College costs have skyrocketed in recent years, and federal direct subsidized and direct unsubsidized loans have strict caps on how much you can borrow. If you need additional money to pay for school, using a private student loan from a lender such as Sallie Mae can be a good option.
 
On the plus side, Sallie Mae offers a wide range of loans, with multiple repayment options, for students of all types. It also has loan forbearance and discharge programs that compare favorably to federal loan discharge policies, and it allows you to apply for a cosigner release in just 12 months, setting it apart from other lenders. However, on the annoyance side, Sallie Mae doesn't allow you to get a rate quote before you apply.
 
Whether Sallie Mae’s interest rates are more competitive than other lenders, including the federal government’s, is a more complicated question. Much depends on your financials. While Sallie Mae’s lowest rates are lower than the fed’s, you’ll probably only qualify for them if you have an excellent credit score—otherwise, you’ll probably end up paying about the same or even more. The lender does offer variable interest rates on its loans, unlike the government—and that can be an advantage in a declining-interest-rate environment.
 
Before making a decision, make sure you compare offers from other private student loan lenders. 
 Sallie Mae has more loan options than any other lender, offering loans for career training, bar study, and medical residency. With multiple loan options, repayment plans, and loan terms, you can customize your loan to meet your needs. And, if you have a creditworthy cosigner, the lender offers competitive rates that can help make the loan more affordable. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of student loan lenders. We collected over 45 data points across more than 15 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their education needs.
 SallieMae.com. "Smart Option Student Loan® for Undergraduate Students." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Career Training Smart Option Student Loan®." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Graduate student loans." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Sallie Mae® MBA Loan." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Sallie Mae® Dental School Loan." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Sallie Mae® Medical School Loan." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Sallie Mae® Law School Loan." Accessed March 19, 2020. SallieMae.com. "Sallie Mae® Bar Study Loan." Accessed March 19, 2020. U.S. Department of Education. "What are the interest rates for federal student loans?" Accessed March 19, 2020.