
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Sallie Mae 
Known primarily for student loans, Sallie Mae got its start in 1973 as a government entity specifically servicing federal student loans. After it went through the process of cutting ties with the federal government between 1997 and 2004, Sallie Mae became a publicly-traded consumer bank. Though private student loans are still part of its menu of products, the bank also offers online-only savings vehicles, credit cards, and private loans. This in-depth and unbiased review can help you decide if Sallie Mae's deposit accounts are right for you.
 Solid interest rates No minimum balances or monthly fees Encourages savings goals No checking accounts available Customers must have another bank to fund Sallie Mae accounts No ATM access Sallie Mae 
Sallie Mae will work best for customers who want an online-only institution to stash their savings. It will be an especially good fit for customers who:
 
Though it is inextricably associated with student loans, Sallie Mae offers a decent number of traditional banking products and services. These include:
 
High-Yield Savings Account has no minimum balance and no monthly fees, and you can open it with $0. The 0.55% APY, while nothing to sneeze at in the current economy, is not the highest rate you can find from a high yield savings account, particularly among online-only banks.
 
However, the lack of monthly fees or minimum balances may make this account tempting to those who might otherwise chase higher yields. In addition, Sallie Mae does not offer a tiered APY depending on your balance. Whether you have a balance of $1 or $250,000, you'll earn the 0.55% APY.
 
SmartyPig Savings Account was created specifically to help savers reach their goals, like a virtual piggy bank. SmartyPig savers have a primary account, where all deposits go, and you can set up multiple savings goals within the primary account. Each of your savings goals gets its own sub-account, so you can track your progress as you add money to meet each goal. This kind of targeted savings strategy helps customers visualize their progress. You can set up automated monthly or biweekly deposits, and you can make withdrawals at any time with no fee.
 
Like the High-Yield Savings Account, SmartyPig has no minimum balance, no monthly fees, and no minimum opening balance. The APY is tiered however. Balances of $2,500 or less enjoy an impressive 1.05% APY--but the APY is reduced as your balance increases, with an APY of 0.95% on balances between $2,500 and $10,000, 0.75% on balances between $10,000 and $50,000, and 0.65% on balances above $50,000. This backwards APY tier is designed to help encourage new savers to get in the habit of putting money away.
 
SmartyPig offers a $10 referral bonus for every friend you refer who opens an account, sets a goal, and contributes to it.
 
Sallie Mae's Money Market Account offers a solid 0.60% APY on all balances. The interest is compounded daily, and paid out monthly, and there are no monthly service fees.
 
What may make the money market account even more tempting for Sallie Mae customers is the fact that these accounts come with check-writing privileges--which means you can enjoy some of the benefits of a checking account. However, it's important to remember that a money market account is not the same as a checking account, even if it does come with paper checks. To start, there is no associated debit or ATM card, so writing a check is the only additional method for accessing your money.
 
In addition, Federal Regulation D limits certain types of withdrawal and transfer transactions on savings and money market accounts to 6 per statement period. Checks are included among that limit of 6 withdrawals. Sallie Mae will levy an excessive transaction fee of $10 if you make more than 6 withdrawals in a month, and you may be charged for up to 7 excessive withdrawal fees per month. (Additional withdrawals past that point will see the $10 fee levied the following month. Unlike some other institutions, Sallie Mae does not appear to close down money market accounts that routinely go over the 6-withdrawal-per-month limit).
 
Sallie Mae offers CDs in terms ranging from 6 months to 60 months. All CDs have a minimum opening deposit of $2,500. If you decide to terminate your CD prior to its maturity date, expect to pay a penalty. CDs with a term of 12 months or less have a penalty equal to 90 days of simple interest. Those with a term greater than 12 months have a penalty equal to 180 days of simple interest.
 
The rates you can expect depend on the term length:
 
All three of the credit cards Sallie Mae offers are cash back cards, providing with a no-annual fee option that puts no limits on cash back earnings and offers a variety of bonus cash back rewards:
 
Customers needing help can reach customer service representatives over the phone from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. ET Monday through Friday. If you need help outside of those times, you are unfortunately out of luck. There is no online live chat or other help options.
 
Sallie Mae does offer a mobile app, which does not appear to be well-regarded among customers. It holds a 3.6 out of 5 star rating on Apple, and a dismal 2.1 out of 5 star rating on Google Play.
 
It's also important to note that Sallie Mae, in its role as a student loan provider and servicer, has been accused of a number of unfair lending practices. While none of these issues are related to Sallie Mae's bank offerings, consumers may want to keep these controversies in mind when deciding if Sallie Mae is the right institution for them.
