
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
With more than 575 branches spread over nine states, Santander Bank has developed into a banking leader in the Northeast region of the U.S. With a multitude of deposit accounts, along with other personal, business, and commercial banking solutions, Santander Bank is a viable banking choice for many consumers.
 Large array of deposit accounts Low initial deposit on checking account Automatic savings feature Waivable monthly fees Average rates on savings accounts Expensive overdraft fees Limited number of branches and ATMs Fees for out-of-network ATMs 
Santander Bank is a good fit for customers who are looking for full-service banking along with online and mobile account managements. It may appeal even more to those who:
 
Santander offers a number of different deposit accounts:
 
All bank accounts through Santander Bank are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) for up to $250,000 per depositor.
 
There are five checking accounts available with Santander Bank.
 
Basic Checking is an entry-level checking account with a $3 monthly fee that can’t be waived. It has a $25 minimum opening deposit but doesn’t have an ongoing balance requirement.
 
Santander Bank’s only checking account with no monthly fee, Student Value Checking is for students ages 14 to 25 and only requires a $10 minimum opening deposit. Once you turn 26, it gets converted to another checking account.
 
Simply Right Checking features a $10 monthly fee that can be waived with just one transaction per month. It requires an initial $25 deposit but has no ongoing balance requirements.
 
Premier Plus Checking is an interest-bearing checking account that currently earns a 0.01% annual percentage yield (APY). There’s also a $25 monthly fee that can be waived by keeping a combined $25,000 in deposits or having $4,000 in direct deposits each month. You can open a Premium Plus account with a $50 initial deposit.
 
This top-of-the-line account also earns interest, but it’s unclear just how much. Select Checking accounts can only be opened at specific Santander branches by a Select banker. It features a steep $75 monthly fee that can be waived with $150,000 in combined deposits and select investment balances. Select Checking customers also receive a dedicated banker, along with a team of specialists for personalized banking service. It requires an initial $150 deposit.
 Premier Plus Checking and Select Checking are the only checking accounts that don’t charge fees for out-of-network ATM use. Student Value Checking charges a $2 fee, while both Basic Checking and Simply Right Checking charge a $3 fee. Keep in mind that an out-of-network bank may also charge a fee for using its ATM. 
There are only two choices when it comes to Santander Bank savings accounts: one for students and one for everybody else.
 
Although it’s an interest-bearing account, Santander Bank’s main savings account, Santander Savings, only earns a 0.03% APY, which is half the national rate of 0.06%.﻿﻿ You won’t make money from this savings account regardless of your account balance. It just can’t compete with the best savings accounts. It has no minimum balance requirements, but you do need at least a $25 initial deposit to open it. There’s also a $1 monthly fee, which is waived when paired with a checking account or an average daily balance of $100 in your savings account.
 
Youth Savings is Santander Bank’s other savings account and is meant for individuals under 18 years old. It has no monthly fee and only a $10 opening deposit requirement.
 
Both savings accounts carry a $3 fee each time you use an out-of-network ATM plus any fees charged by the ATM owner.
 
The highest interest rates earned at Santander Bank are reserved for its three money market accounts.
 
Money Market Savings has no minimum balance requirement, but you do need an initial deposit of $25 to open one. It has a $10 monthly fee that can be waived with a Santander checking account or a $10,000 average daily balance in your money market account.
 
Premium Plus Money Market Savings is the same as the previously mentioned money market account except that it has no monthly fee. It also requires a Premier Plus Checking account to open one.
 
The bank’s top-tier money market account, Select Money Market Savings, can only be opened at specific Santander branches. It requires a Select Checking account and a $25 minimum opening deposit.
 
Rates on Santander Bank’s money market accounts vary based on your location. The following rates were quoted for New York City on July 30, 2020.
 
Santander offers CDs with terms from three months to five years. You’ll need to visit your local branch to get current interest rates. A $500 minimum deposit is required.
 
Santander customers have the option of what to do with interest earned from CDs. You can either keep it in your CD account to compound or transfer it to another bank account.
 
Customers are subject to early withdrawal penalties if they take out funds before their CDs reach maturity. Once they do, you can withdraw funds without a penalty or reinvest them in another CD.
 
Besides bank accounts, Santander also offers one consumer credit card. With the Santander Ultimate Cash Back credit card, customers earn cash back at rates comparable to many competing cards. The card also offers an introductory annual percentage rate (APR) offer on purchases and balance transfers. There is no annual fee, and there are no foreign transaction fees.
 
Santander Bank offers other popular financial solutions like:
 
Santander Bank customer service comes mainly through phone support, available at 877-768-2265 between 7 a.m. and 9 p.m. CST Monday through Friday, and 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. CST Saturdays. Customers can also fill out an inquiry form on Santander’s website for general questions.
 
In-person help is also available if you live near a local Santander Bank branch. There are currently branches in nine states:
