
Scheduled personal property is a supplemental insurance policy that extends coverage beyond the standard protection provided in a homeowners' insurance policy. By purchasing a scheduled personal property policy, owners can ensure full coverage of expensive items, such as jewelry, in the event of a claim.
 
Scheduled personal property goes beyond the coverage offered in standard homeowners' policies. Standard policies do not cover all types of property and set limitations on the value amount the insurance company will pay for specific losses.
 
Examples of possessions that may have limited coverage from standard policies include fine artwork, antiques, jewels, furs, and gold coins or bars. Policyholders wishing to guard these and other items should purchase additional coverage with a scheduled personal property policy. 
 
On a standard homeowners policy, coverage divides into categories including 
 
Personal property on most policies include clothing, shoes, furniture, appliances, and other items. However, there are limits for the coverage value for each item. Property such as electronics, firearms, business property, and watercraft may have limitations. Some companies may even cover your personal property if damage occurs when you are away from home, but there may be a limit on the dollar amount of coverage. In some situations, property owned by others may also be covered under a standard policy.
 Unscheduled personal property refers to items that are covered by personal property coverage but have not been specifically itemized; these items are subject to the standard coverage limits. 
Policyholders receive a full copy of their policy, which usually runs at least 20 pages. The policy details the dollar amount for the standard coverage of various categories. As an example, your policy may state that it will cover a maximum of $1,500 for losses of watches, precious stones, and other jewelry. People with collections that are valued at more than the maximum coverage amount should consider supplemental scheduled property coverage. 
 
The assigning of the value of the insured property will vary by the insurance provider. Most companies will require copies of either a receipt or an appraisal of the item before providing the coverage. 
 
Scheduled personal property coverage provides three specific advantages that extend beyond the benefits of a standard insurance policy:
