
Section 7702 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Tax Code defines what the federal government considers to be a legitimate life insurance contract and is used to determine how the proceeds are taxed.
 
The proceeds of policies that do not meet the government's definition are taxable as ordinary income. Proceeds from genuine life insurance contracts are tax-advantaged.
 
Section 7702 applies to life insurance contracts issued after 1984.﻿﻿
 
Prior to the adoption of Section 7702, federal tax law took a fairly hands-off approach when it came to the taxation of life insurance policies. Death benefits paid to life insurance beneficiaries were exempt from income tax, and any gains that accrued within the policy during the policyholder's lifetime were not taxed as income.
 
Aside from the insurance industry's formidable lobbying power, the reasoning behind this favorable tax treatment was that the government did not want to be seen taxing needy widows and children. The problem was that the generous tax breaks given to recipients of the proceeds of insurance policies led some companies to try to pass off other investment accounts as life insurance products.
 The owner of a life insurance policy that fails Section 7702 tests loses any potential tax benefits. 
Section 7702 was created to differentiate between genuine life insurance policies and investment vehicles masquerading as them and to make sure that only the genuine policies received advantageous tax treatment.﻿﻿
 
Under Section 7702, life insurance contracts have to pass one of two tests: the cash value accumulation test (CVAT) or the guideline premium and corridor test (GPT).
 
What happens if a life insurance contract fails to pass either of those tests? Section 7702(g) stipulates that the income on the contract will be treated as ordinary income for that year and taxed accordingly. In other words, the owner of the contract will lose the favorable tax treatment of a true life insurance policy.﻿﻿
 
In recent years, some insurance companies and agents have invoked Section 7702 in offers of so-called "7702 plans." These are sold as safer alternatives to IRAs and 401(k) plans for retirement savings.
 
This is a marketing gimmick to sell cash value life insurance. In fact, it's unlikely to be a better deal than an IRA or a 401(k) once all of the commissions and fees have been taken into account.
 U.S. House of Representatives Office of the Law Revision Counsel. "26 USC 7702: Life insurance contract defined." Accessed August 22, 2020. U.S. Congress Joint Committee on Taxation. "General explanation of the revenue provisions of the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984." Pages 579-580. Accessed August 22, 2020.