
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Select Home Warranty  
Select Home Warranty offers about average coverage and pricing, but significant sign-up bonuses for new customers, including $100 off, two months free, and free roof leak coverage when you pay upfront for an annual policy.
 Based on our review of over a dozen home warranty companies, Select Home Warranty was not one of the best companies we found. To see other options that may be better, visit our list of the best home warranty companies. Receive a discount and two months free if paying annually Customers receive free roof leak coverage for the first two months Provides an unlimited number of covered repairs Lack of transparency in terms of pricing for a service call More than one service call fee may be charged if services are in separate categories 
Headquartered in Mahwah, New Jersey, Select Home Warranty offers homeowners three plan options and, for an additional charge, coverage for things like central vacuums, pools, and septic systems. Coverage is for 12 months, but discounts may be offered for multiple-year policies.
 
Policies are available throughout the United States except for residents of California, Nevada, New York, Washington, and Wisconsin. The company offers home warranties for single-family homes, mobile homes, rental properties, condos, and multiple units.
 Select Home Warranty  
Select Home Warranty opened its doors in 2012 and offers different home warranty plans for homeowners, realtors, and real estate investors. Your monthly fee covers repairs or replacement of home appliances and systems covered as stated within the policy. You’ll be responsible for paying a trade service fee per repair and any amount above the policy’s allowance.
 
Select Home Warranty has competitive offers such as roof leak coverage and two months of free service when you pay annually. Ratings from the Better Business Bureau are lower compared to other warranty companies and suggest that claims take longer than advertised to complete. We did a comprehensive review of Select Home Warranty by diving into their prices, coverage, caps, and exclusions.
 
Select Home Warranty offers three different tiers, all with 30-day waiting periods, a list of items covered, and the option to add on additional items. The price you pay does not include the trade service fee (TSF). Think of the TSF as a deductible you need to pay upfront in order to get an independent contractor to come to your home to assess and fix the issue.
 
Realtors can purchase home warranty plans from Select Home Warranty. However, there is no tangible information on specific plans or pricing. To receive more information or to get a quote, real estate professionals can fill out the online inquiry form or call customer service at 855-267-3532 to speak to a representative.
 
Select Home Warranty lets you request a quote online so you can preview pricing before signing up. The company offers a decent list of items it covers with a bonus introductory offer—free roof leak coverage, two extra months free, and $100 off your plan if you pay for an annual plan upfront.
 
Pricing for plans depends on the number of items you want to get coverage for within your home. For example, the Gold Care (covers systems) and Bronze Care (covers appliances) plans cost $36 a month, but they only cover up to six and eight items, respectively. Compare this to the Platinum Care plan, which covers 17 items but costs $75 a month.
 
Add-ons are available to customize the policy to your home needs. These items include your home’s central vacuum, pool, sump pump, well pump, standalone freezer, lawn sprinkler system, septic system, and roof leaks.
 
For all plans, customers will pay a trade service fee anywhere from $60 to $75, depending on location. This is on par with competitors.
 
Systems and appliances that break down from normal wear and tear are typically covered under your Select Home Warranty policy. However, the company has a list of exclusions you’ll want to consult before signing up. Keep in mind that an item may be covered, but there are exclusions as to which parts or components are included in your policy.
 
For example, window, wall, and portable air conditioning units are excluded from coverage, as are Freon leaks or any damage caused by one. Also, roof leak coverage does not include metal roofs, shingles, patios, gutters, or skylights. Look at Select Home Warranty’s terms and conditions page for a more exhaustive list of what’s included and what’s not.
 Though an item may be covered, certain parts or components may not be. 
There is no limit to the number of repairs serviced during the contract term. However, there are dollar cap amounts that are slightly lower than the industry average. Examples of caps include $2,000 for heating or cooling equipment, $500 for plumbing and electrical equipment, $250 for Freon coverage (if you chose this as part of your policy), and $400 for other additional coverage options.
 
In addition, homeowners need to provide annual maintenance and cleaning records by a licensed technician for covered items or risk losing coverage. If you don’t have proof of maintenance records for the past three years, then Select Home Warranty will offer a maximum payout amount of $150 for appliances.
 
Select Home Warranty has its own network of authorized independent contractors throughout their service areas. You won’t be able to choose your own repair person, although there may be exceptions with prior company consent. Without consent, repairs made by repairmen outside of the network are not reimbursable. Once you’ve made a claim, most major repairs will receive authorization within 24 to 96 hours. For emergency service, Select Home Warranty will work with you to dispatch a contractor as quickly as possible, similar to what other companies offer.
 Select has a B-rating from the BBB but also several complaints, especially about poor response times. 
Customers can receive 24/7 support and can file a claim through an online form, via email, or by calling customer service at 888-298-6173. Once the claim is made, Select Home Warranty will start the process immediately. It can take anywhere from 24 to 96 hours to receive an authorization for a major repair, as is the industry standard.
 
This home warranty company isn’t accredited with the Better Business Bureau, but it has a B rating with the organization.﻿﻿ Select Home Warranty has a rating of one out of five stars based on 3,411 complaints and 803 reviews. Some complaints reported a lack of responsiveness by the independent contractors who service warranty claims. The company encourages customers to resolve concerns by calling 855-267-3532 or emailing them at info@selecthomewarranty.com first.
