
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Shell Fuel Rewards Mastercard gives cardholders 10 cents off per gallon on up to 20 gallons per purchase on Shell fuel purchases. You earn rebates of 10% on non-fuel purchases from Shell to a $1,200 annual spending limit and of 2% on up to $10,000 in dining and groceries purchases. The card has no annual fee.
 Get 5¢ off per gallon with Fuel Rewards Gold Status and 25¢/gal with the Shell Fuel Rewards Credit Card for a total of 30¢/gal (up to 20 gallons) on your first 5 Shell fuel purchases. Strong rewards on gas Respectable rewards on groceries and dining Automatic rebate redemption Rebates have some restrictions Application process could result in receiving a less-appealing card Very small value to the one-time offer Half of the Shell fuel savings do not require the card 
The Shell Fuel Rewards Mastercard is best suited to loyal Shell customers who visit the refiner’s stations often, both to fill up and to make purchases in station stores. The 10-cents-a-gallon rebate on Shell gas could really add up over a year, and the 10% discount on non-fuel purchases could contribute extra savings. 
 
It’s also a decent option if you have no other card that rewards food purchases, for both groceries and dining. Its 2% rebates compare favorably with those you might earn from a better cash back card. However, since the rewards you earn can only be used for Shell fuel purchases, those who purchase gasoline elsewhere will not likely find enough benefits to consider this card.
 
The Shell Fuel Rewards Mastercard offers a one-time offer worth up to $20 if you fully maximize it. The bonus is advertised as a 30 cents savings per gallon on Shell fuel purchases, but the card already offers a 10 cents savings per gallon on Shell fuel purchases. That makes the real benefit only 20 cents per gallon. 
 
You receive those savings on your first five purchases at Shell stations, each of up to 20 gallons of fuel. If you buy less than 20 gallons on any of your first 5 Shell fuel purchases, your bonus won’t reach the maximum $20 value. There is usually a time limit by which you must complete the five purchases. For example, at the time of writing, you needed to apply for the card by June 30, 2020, and make the purchases by Oct. 31, 2020, to qualify for this offer.
 
The one-time offer is for new accounts only. The savings should be applied at the time of purchase. If they aren’t, you will receive the savings in the form of a statement credit automatically posted to your monthly billing statement.
 
This card offers two benefits that could be considered rewards. The first is the ongoing 10 cents per gallon discount on up to 20 gallons of Shell fuel bought at a time. You receive the reward in two distinct halves. First, you save 5 cents per gallon at the point of sale, as a benefit of having Gold status in Shell’s Fuel Rewards program, which the card automatically confers. If these savings can’t be awarded at point of sale, a statement credit will be issued to your account. The average price per gas as per the U.S. Department of Energy will be used if data on how many gallons you purchased is not available.
 
A further 5 cents per gallon is then issued as a rebate on your monthly card statements. 
 
A note on Fuel Rewards: It’s a free program for which anyone can register. Gold Status is automatically given to new Fuel Rewards members for the first six months of their membership and is maintained provided you fill up at Shell with at least five gallons six times in the prior three month period. 
 
In addition to savings on fuel purchases, you also earn rebates of 10% of the amount you spend on anything else at Shell stations, up to a maximum “spend” of $1,200 a year.
 
Further, the card allows you to earn 2% in Shell rebates on your first $10,000 of dining and grocery purchases each year. Any Shell non-fuel purchases, dining or grocery purchases made in excess of the limits do not earn rebates. The annual rebate year starts the first day of your billing cycle in the calendar month of December and ends on the last day of your billing cycle in the following December.
 
You also earn 1% Shell rebates on all other qualified purchases. These do not include purchases made at locations selling non-Shell branded fuel, or on purchases for business or commercial purposes. 
 
Rebates not redeemed within 12 billing cycles after they are earned expire, which shouldn’t pose an issue for frequent Shell fuel customers. Your account must be open and current to get savings on fuel purchases as well as to earn and redeem rebates.
 
The Shell rebates you earn are automatically redeemed against Shell purchases made when using your card. The Shell rebates are applied as a credit to your account in subsequent billing cycles after they are earned.
