
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Shop Your Way Mastercard from Citibank is designed to reward cardholders who regularly shop at Sears and Kmart stores. This card also offers generous rewards on everyday purchases, including gas.
 Earn $40 statement credit when you spend $50 on eligible purchases in the first 30 days after you are approved for a new Shop You Way Mastercard. The Shop Your Way Mastercard is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Very competitive rewards for everyday purchases Bonus rewards for restaurant purchases No annual fee Rewards earnings are capped Rewards points can expire Redemption options are limited 
The Shop Your Way Mastercard is best for someone who regularly shops at Sears and Kmart and charges their everyday purchases, such as gas and groceries. This card may be suited to you if you're looking for rewards that you can apply to future shopping trips at Sears or Kmart, versus other uses, such as travel or statement credit. Depending on how frequently you shop and charge everyday spending, you could easily save a decent amount of money by earning a percentage of what you charge back in points. 
 
The Shop Your Way Mastercard does offer a one-time offer but it's structured differently than what you might expect with a typical rewards card.
 
Instead of earning a set amount of points for meeting a minimum spending requirement, you can earn a $40 statement credit. To qualify for this credit, you need to spend $50 or more on eligible purchases within 30 days of being approved for a new account. 
 
This is a limited time offer and is currently good through Jan. 30, 2021. And it’s only for new cardholders who apply for the card online. 
 
When you use this card, you earn a percentage of your purchases back as points. There are four different rewards tiers, based on what you charge:
 
There are a few things to remember here about earning rewards with this card. First, the 5% and 3% back categories are capped to the first $10,000 in combined purchases each calendar year. So once you hit that limit, your rewards rate will revert to 1% back until the next year begins. 
 
Also, not all purchases qualify for the 5% or 3% rewards rates. For instance, gas purchased at superstores or warehouse clubs earns 1% back instead. The same goes for groceries purchased at warehouse clubs or superstores. 
 
You do, however, have the potential to boost your rewards earnings by shopping through the Shop Your Way Card Link program. This program allows you to use your card to earn additional rewards at partner merchants, including GasBuddy, Uber, and Hotels by Shop Your Way. 
 
Shop Your Way is free to join, and if you aren’t already a member you’ll be automatically enrolled when you sign up for the Shop Your Way Mastercard. 
 
Redeeming rewards is simple, since there's only one option. When you log into your Shop Your Way Mastercard account, you can browse available merchandise and redeem your points to shop. Options range from everyday items like paper towels to major appliances and electronics. 
 
Again, remember that you only have 12 months to redeem points after earning them or else they'll expire. 
 
Maximizing rewards is all about being strategic with how you spend and taking advantage of opportunities to earn additional points as a Shop Your Way program member. With that in mind, here's a quick look at two different scenarios for making the most of this card. 
 
In the average case, let's assume that you spend $2,000 a year on gas and $3,000 combined on groceries and dining out. You'd earn 19,000 points on those purchases. Add in $3,000 in purchases at Sears and Kmart and $1,000 in miscellaneous purchases and you’d increase your rewards total to 26,000 points, worth $260 based on our valuation of $.001 of Shop Your Way points.
 
Earning 26,000 points isn't bad. But say you spend $3,000 per year on gas and $7,000 on groceries and dining out. You'd earn 36,000 points on those purchases alone. If you spent $10,000 a year at Sears and Kmart and $5,000 on miscellaneous purchases, you'd bring your rewards total to 61,000 points, worth $610 based on our points valuation.
 
The Shop Your Way Mastercard is issued by Citi, which received a score of 799 out of 1,000 in J.D. Power's 2019 U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study. For perspective, the average among national card issuers was 806. 
