
Online buying and selling have become important parts of many people's lives. Students and parents rely on the Internet to acquire and sell textbooks at affordable prices. Virtual stores allow people to shop from the comfort of their homes without the pressure of a salesperson, and online marketplaces provide a new and more convenient venue for the exchange of virtually all types of goods and services.
 
Both businesses and customers have embraced online sales as a cheaper and more convenient way to shop, but just like anything associated with the Internet, there are benefits and dangers associated with shopping online. Read on to learn how to protect yourself while you use this handy resource.
 
Shopping online is just like heading out to the store. Oftentimes, you can buy the same products online as available in a brick-and-mortar store and can sometimes score better sales.
 
When you shop online, you have to start by searching for a product. This can be done by visiting a store's website, or if you are not aware of any store that has the particular item you are looking for or you'd like to compare prices between stores, you can always search for the items with a search engine and compare the results.
 
On major retail websites, companies will have pictures, descriptions, and prices. If a company or individual does not have the means to create a website, some sites like Amazon and Yahoo! make it possible for them to display products or build their own online stores for a monthly fee.﻿﻿
 
Other websites like eBay and Bidz provide an auction format, in which sellers can display items for a minimum price and buyers can bid on these items until the listing ends or the seller chooses to award it to a buyer. ﻿﻿﻿Most stores also have placed virtual customer service centers on their websites, so you can either call, email or chat with a live customer service representative if you have questions.
 
After selecting a product, the webpage usually has a "checkout" option. When you check out, you are often given a list of shipping and payment options. Shipping options include standard, expedited, and/or overnight shipping. Depending on the shipping company and your location, standard shipping usually takes seven to 21 business days, and expedited shipping can take anywhere from two to six business days.
 
There are typically various payment options available:
 
There are a lot of benefits gained from buying and selling online. These include:
 
There are also disadvantages to buying and selling online. These include:
 U.S. consumers can report fraud, abuse, and incidents of identity theft with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). 
Overall, the advantages of shopping online outweigh the disadvantages. That said, it is important to note that while they might be smaller in number, the disadvantages can be a major hardship.
 
While shopping online, it is very important to protect yourself and your information. Here are some tips that can help you take care of yourself:
 
Buying and selling online can be very convenient and rewarding, but you always have to protect yourself. If a deal looks too good to be true, it usually is. If you don't feel 100% secure on a particular site, leave it and find something else. Also, make sure that your computer is well protected before you begin any transaction that involves sensitive information. There are a lot of scams on the Internet that can negatively affect your credit score and cost you money, so be proactive in your research to get the most out of shopping online.
 Amazon. "Become an Amazon Seller." Accessed April 19, 2020. eBay. "Start Selling on eBay." Accessed April 19, 2020.