
Peope who have racked up more debt than they can repay are sometimes left to ponder whether they should file for bankruptcy. There are several reasons it might make sense to take the plunge and file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy or Chapter 13 bankruptcy. However, making that decision also carries some serious consequences.
 
There are some circumstances in which filing for bankruptcy may be your best (or only) recourse:
 
Filing for bankruptcy is sometimes the right decision, but it is not without consequences. Those include:
 
Another consideration is the cost of filing for bankruptcy. Filing typically costs a couple of hundred dollars, but hiring an attorney to represent you and protect your interests could cost a great deal more. Although individuals can act on their own behalf without an attorney, by going it alone you run the risk of losing certain rights or property. Generally speaking, because of their knowledge of bankruptcy law and experience with the courts, an attorney can be worth the money.
 After bankruptcy, you will probably find it difficult to get a credit card, except at a very high interest rate. One alternative is a secured card, where you put some money on deposit with the issuer. 
As mentioned above, bankruptcy will remain on your credit reports for years into the future, and those reports may be consulted by potential lenders, insurance companies, landlords, employers, and others. You can't do anything to remove the information ahead of schedule, but it's worth checking to make sure that it's accurate and doesn't cast you in an even more negative light. You are entitled to at least one free report each year from each of the three major credit bureaus—Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion—through the official, federally authorized website, Annual Credit Report.com. If you find any errors on a report, you should ask that that they be corrected.
 
Aside from your credit report, bankruptcy is also a matter of public record. So bear in mind that anyone can request a copy of the filing.
 
Because your credit is severely damaged by bankruptcy, you may find it difficult to borrow if you need to, including a loan to buy a car or a mortgage to buy a home. It will also be difficult to obtain a conventional credit card. One alternative is to apply for a secured credit card, where you deposit money with the card issuer to back up your line of credit. If you use the card judiciously, making all your monthly payments on time, you may soon qualify for a regular, unsecured credit card. A secured credit card is often recommended as a tool for rebuilding a damaged credit record.
 
Bankruptcy can be the only solution to some people's financial problems, but it isn't to be entered into lightly. Before making any decisions, it's worth consulting a reputable credit counselor and trying to negotiate with creditors to see if you can work out a payment plan. Credit counseling is also a mandatory step in the bankruptcy process.
 
Speaking with a lawyer before you've made up your mind may also be a good investment. If you ultimately decide that you have no alternative but to file, remember that the damage to your credit will be long-lasting but not permanent. By taking the right steps in the future, you can gradually rebuild your credit and get back on track.
