
Whether you work for a private company, a non-profit organization, or a government agency, these days you probably have access to a retirement savings plan. It may be called a 401(k), a 403(b), or a 457(b). It will certainly offer the traditional version of a retirement savings plan, but it may also offer a Roth option.
 
Whether it offers a Roth option is up to your employer. So is the selection of investments you can choose from. Most of them will be mutual funds, but they may range from highly conservative bond funds to highly speculative stock funds.
 
Seven in 10 employers who offer a retirement plan include the Roth option, although only about 23% of employees chose it, according to two different surveys.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
It's worth considering. The Roth can be a little more pain in your working years in return for a lot more gain once you retire.
 
When you invest in a Roth account, you pay with after-tax dollars. But when you withdraw money after you retire, you owe zero taxes on that money. The investment returns over time are tax-free, and you have already paid the income tax on your contribution.
 
If you invest in a traditional retirement account, you pay with pre-tax dollars. Your taxable income is reduced by the amount you pay in. That softens the impact of the loss in your take-home pay. After you retire, you'll owe income taxes on those pre-tax dollars you put in, and on the investment returns the account generated.
 
There are a few other differences that won't matter much to you until you retire. Investors in a traditional account must begin taking required minimum distributions (RMD) by age 72. In the past, you had to stop contributing to a traditional IRA at the same age taking RMDs was required.
 
As of 2020, because of the Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act of 2019, you can contribute to a traditional IRA at any age so long as you have income. Neither restriction applies to the Roth account.﻿﻿
 Percentage of employees who choose the Roth option over the traditional retirement option. 
If your employer offers both traditional and Roth options, you can split your money between the two if you like. You just can't pay in more than the maximum amount allowable for either or both.
 
For both the 401(k) and the 403(b), that is $19,500 for 2020 ($19,000 for 2019), plus another $6,500 ($6,000 for 2019) if you are aged 50 or older. For the 457(b) plan, the limits are the same except that you can pay in up to $39,000 for 2020 ($38,000 for 2019) if you're three years or less from retirement age.﻿﻿
 
Your employer may place other limits on the amount you contribute.
 
You can even change your mind any time and roll over a traditional account to a Roth account, or vice versa.
 
Just remember, if you're converting a traditional account to a Roth account, you'll owe income taxes on the balance in that tax year. If you're converting a Roth to a traditional IRA, the taxes paid will be restored to your account.﻿﻿
 
If your employer gives you the opportunity to contribute to either, the following are some personal factors that might point to favoring the Roth option:
 
Reasons to stick to the traditional retirement account might include:
 Plan Sponsor Council of America. "PSCA Releases Its 62nd Annual Survey Results." Accessed April 25, 2020. Willis Towers Watson. "U.S. Employers Enhancing Defined Contribution Retirement Plans to Help Improve Workers' Financial Security." Accessed April 25, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "IRA FAQs - Distributions (Withdrawals)." Accessed April 25, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Retirement Topics - IRA Contribution Limits." Accessed April 25, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "IRA FAQs - Rollovers and Roth Conversions." Accessed April 25, 2020.