
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Simple is an online service that offers checking accounts with a competitive interest rate, a no-penalty certificate of deposit (CD), and personal loans. The Portland, Ore.–based mobile banking innovator launched in 2009 as a way for people to escape the frustrations of dealing with traditional banks. In this in-depth review, we’ll look at all of its accounts and features, so you can determine if Simple is right for you.
 No monthly fees High-yield checking with competitive rate No overdraft fees No minimum balance requirements No savings account No cash deposits No online bill pay option Average CD rates 
Simple is a great fit for people who like banking online with no monthly or overdraft fees. Simple gives customers a way to:
 
Simple lives up to its name, with only two account choices available:
 
Simple Account
 
A Simple account is the online service’s primary checking account. It has no monthly fees or minimum balance requirements. It also earns a 0.01% APY. The account comes with a Simple Visa debit card, perfect to use anywhere Visa debit is accepted or at the more than 40,000 fee-free Allpoint ATMs across the U.S.
 
Other Simple account features include:
 
Simple accounts also come with several built-in tools to help customers manage their money effectively. These include:
 Customers who use their Simple Debit card internationally may be charged an international service assessment fee by Visa of up to 1% per transaction. 
Protected Goals Account
 
A Protected Goals checking account operates similar to a savings account. You’ll need to open a Simple account first, though, before you can open one.
 
Perhaps its best feature is the high-yield interest customers can earn. With a 1.20% APY earned on all balance tiers (starting at one cent), your savings will add up quickly with this checking account.
 
Customers can set up savings goals in their Protected Goals account and enable automated savings to build up your goal balance quicker. Protected Goal accounts do not carry any monthly service fees.
 
Shared Checking
 
Individuals who want to share a bank account can do so with a Simple Shared Account and a Simple Shared Protected Goals account. Both individuals need to first open an individual Simple account, which is used to fund the shared account.
 
Having a shared account allows couples, roommates, friends, and other people to pool their money together to use toward a mutual goal. Interest earning from these accounts mirrors that earned from individual accounts, with a Shared checking account earning a 0.01% APY and a Shared Protected Goals account earning a 1.20% APY.
 
Simple also offers a CD with only one term option—12 months. It has a minimum opening deposit of $250 with a fixed rate of 1.00%, which is higher than many traditional banks but much less than you’ll find at the top online banks.
 
This is a no-penalty CD, meaning you get the benefits of a locked-in savings rate and the ability to withdraw all of your funds anytime after seven days since opening without facing penalties.
 
Besides personal and joint banking solutions, Simple has one other offering:
 
You can reach Simple’s customer service through two primary ways:
