
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The SKYPASS Visa Secured is a secured card that may allow people with no or poor credit to build a credit profile in the United States while also earning miles that can be used for rewards flights on Korean Air and eligible SkyTeam partner flights, including Delta. In addition to miles rewards, the card offers a number of travel benefits and a bonus opportunity. It carries a $50 annual fee.
 30,000 bonus miles after you spend $3,000 within the first 90 days Builds credit while earning miles Possibility to move to an unsecured card Easy-to-earn bonus $50 annual fee Foreign transaction fees Credit must be secured 
The SKYPASS Visa Secured card is best suited to those who seek a single card to both build credit and earn miles for travel. It’s especially useful for expats who haven’t yet established credit in the United States and want to build their travel reward balance while they do so.  
 
In addition, it’s for people who have some cash in hand, since the card’s credit limit—at least at first—is limited to the amount you can deposit to secure its credit limit.
 
But since its rewards are issued in miles, this is also a card for those willing and able to wait until they have enough rewards to earn an awards flight—which generally means amassing tens of thousands of miles. While the ticket must be booked through Korean Air, it needn’t necessarily be for a Korean Air flight, since SKYPASS miles can also be used on flights with Korean’s SkyTeam partners, which include Delta, KLM, and Air France. Because of that redemption flexibility, this card also offers value for travelers who frequently fly SkyTeam. 
 
It’s a useful card as well for international travelers who can benefit from bilingual customer service and 24-hour bilingual account access. 
 
After making a purchase with this card, you’ll receive a one-time award of 5,000 bonus miles. It will take 6 to 8 weeks for the miles to be credited to your SKYPASS account. At 1.6 cents per mile, we value the 5,000 miles at $80 when redeemed for airline purchases.
 
Along with the bonus, card members are awarded an annual renewal bonus of 1,000 miles in 8 to 10 weeks after paying the annual fee. To be eligible for the award, the annual fee must be paid in the month in which it's due.  
 
This card’s rewards structure is straightforward: You earn one mile for every dollar you spend on the card. If you spend $5,000 within a year, then, you earn 5,000 miles. There's no limit to the number of miles you can earn. The more you spend, the more you earn.
 
In order to earn miles, the SKYPASS frequent flyer number connected to the card must be that of the primary cardholder. It needs to be provided within 120 days of opening the account.
 
Miles earned with this card can be redeemed for award travel and upgrades on Korean Air and SkyTeam partners through the SKYPASS program. Leading the list of SkyTeam partners is Delta Air Lines. The other members of the alliance are KLM, Air France, Alitalia, Aeroflot, Aerolíneas Argentinas, Aeromexico, Air Europa, China Airlines, China Eastern, China Southern, Czech Airlines, Garuda Indonesia, Kenya Airways, Middle East Airlines, Saudia, TAROM, Vietnam Airlines, and XiamenAir. Beyond the SkyTeam alliance, Korean Air points can also be redeemed for flights on six other carriers, including Alaska Airlines and Hawaiian Airlines, provided the flights originate and end within the same country. 
 
Cardholders can redeem rewards through the Korean Air website, a service center or at a local branch.
 
You can redeem miles for:
 
SKYPASS miles can’t be transferred to other loyalty programs. However, Korean Air allows you to transfer miles earned from partners to the SKYPASS program. Those partners include major brands like Marriott, Hyatt, Alamo, Citi Bank, and more. Details for the SYPASS program can be found here.
 
Make the most of this card by taking advantage of both its credit building potential and its travel rewards. To do that, use it responsibly to pay for travel and daily expenses to boost both your credit score and the miles you earn. 
 
In order to build a healthy credit profile, follow the expert advice to pay your monthly bill in full on time. Also since low credit usage is considered a positive factor by the agencies that score your credit, keep your spending at any one time to no more than 30% of your available credit, if you can. (That is, if you’ve deposited $1,000 to secure your credit limit with this card, try to keep your balance at or below $300.)  
 
Since there's no limit to the number of miles you can earn or restrictions on how to earn them, consider using this card for all types of expenses, not just travel.
 
Consider this example to see how many miles you might be able to earn on this card. Let's say you purchase a domestic round-trip flight for $350 once per year and stay three nights in a hotel that costs $150 per night. In addition, let's assume you spend $200 per month on other expenses, such as food or personal care. That spending would total $3,200 for the year, and so earn 3,200 miles. Given our valuation of the miles at 1.6 cents each, the value of those rewards is approximately $51 when redeemed for flight purchases. That almost exactly matches the $50 annual cost of the card. 
 
Naturally, higher spending on this card leads to bigger rewards. Let's say you travel twice per year, taking two round-trip flights (at $350 each) and spending a total of five nights (at $150 a night) in hotels. Those purchases total $1,450: $700 in airfare and $750 in hotel stays. In addition, you use the card for food (both at home and at restaurants), apparel, entertainment, and personal care products. According to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, you'd spend a combined total of about $14,000 per year on those expense categories. In total, then, you’d spend $15,450, which would earn you 15,450 miles. At 1.6 cents per mile in value, we estimate those rewards to be worth $247 when redeemed for flights.
 
US Bank, the institution that issues this card, is at best middling at satisfying its credit card customers, according to J.D. Power's 2019 Credit Card Satisfaction Study. The company received a score of 785 out of a possible 1,000. That’s more than 20 points below the average score of 806 among national card issuers. 
