
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
SoFi personal loan rates can be competitive for borrowers with good to excellent credit. On top of its potentially low rates, the lender also charges no fees and well-qualified applicants may be able to borrow up to $100,000.﻿﻿ 
 
Our SoFi personal loan review breaks down the details you need to know to decide if the lender is a good fit for your borrowing needs. 
 Competitive interest rates for well-qualified applicants Pay zero fees to borrow High loan amounts available for borrowers who need large loans Good personal credit needed to qualify Borrowers with excellent credit may find lower rates with other lenders Funding process is slower than some other lenders 
Personal loan borrowers affected by the coronavirus pandemic can apply for payment deferral. SoFi states that "For those that continue to experience hardship, we will work with you to find possible options."﻿﻿
 
You can use a personal loan from SoFi for a variety of purposes. Loans are available for credit card consolidation, home improvements, medical costs, relocation, and more. As long as you don’t plan to use the loan for restricted reasons (see below), it’s up to you to determine where you will spend the money you borrow.
 
SoFi personal loans cannot be used for any of the following reasons:
 
A drawback of SoFi personal loans is the time it may take to receive your funds. Where some lenders may let you access funds as soon as the day you apply for a personal loan, SoFi borrowers may have to wait several days to receive the money they borrow. 
 
As a SoFi personal loan borrower, the lender offers you the ability to temporarily put off your payments if you lose your job through no fault of your own. You can apply to put your loan into forbearance for three months. SoFi gives you the option to temporarily suspend payments up to four times throughout the life of your loan (12 months of total forbearance). 
 
You can check the rates and terms you qualify to receive with only a soft credit check that won’t impact your credit score. If you decide to apply for the loan, a hard inquiry (which might affect your credit score) will take place. 
 
Want a loved one to co-sign for your personal loan? SoFi allows joint applications from borrowers who share the same address. Joint applications may take up to two extra weeks to process. Keep in mind that co-signers are equally responsible for debts. So, if the worst happens and you can’t make your payments, it could damage your credit and the credit of your co-borrower. 
 
SoFi offers a mobile app for both Apple and Android users. You can use the app to apply for loans, make payments, and review your balances.
 
﻿When your loan application is approved, you become a SoFi member. Membership gives you benefits like free financial planning help, career services, and access to member events nationwide.
 
You can discover whether you may be eligible for a SoFi personal loan, along with your rate and terms, with a soft initial credit check. Use either the SoFi website or app to initiate this process. Here’s what to expect. 
 
After your loan is approved and you e-sign your loan agreement, you should be able to access your funds within a few days. 
