
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 SoFi 
Our Take
 
For students who need to borrow a significant amount of money for their education, such as MBA or medical school students, SoFi may be a good match for you. You can borrow up to the total cost of attendance, and SoFi charges no origination, application, or late fees.
 No origination, application, or late fees Loans up to the total cost of attendance Unemployment protection and forbearance available High loan minimum Limited repayment term options SoFi 
If you need money to pay for college, SoFi allows you to borrow up to the total cost of attendance. The lender offers competitive interest rates and flexible repayment options and has loans for undergraduate, graduate, and parent borrowers. It also provides extra perks, such as career coaching, referral bonuses, and free financial planning to help you after graduation.
 
However, SoFi has a high loan minimum, so it may not be the best lender for you. Here’s what you should know about SoFi student loans.
 As a SoFi member, you’re entitled to a free financial planning session with a certified financial planner (CFP). During your session, you can talk about paying down your debt, develop a plan for buying a home, or discuss saving for retirement as you start your career. 
As an independent undergraduate student—a married student, a veteran of the U.S. armed forces, a person with children or dependents who receive more than half of their support from them, a person with deceased parents or who was in foster care, a person that was an emancipated minor, or was an unaccompanied youth who was homeless—the most you can borrow in federal direct subsidized and unsubsidized loans per year is $9,500.﻿﻿ If you need more than that to pay for school, taking out private student loans from a lender like SoFi can help. With SoFi, you can borrow up to the total cost of attendance. SoFi student loans have no application, origination, or late fees, and there are no penalties if you decide to pay off your loan early.
 
If you’re going to graduate school to pursue a master’s degree, you can use SoFi to pay for your education. You can borrow up to the total cost of attendance and take advantage of flexible repayment options. The total cost of attendance varies by school, but it typically includes tuition and fees, on-campus room and board, books, supplies, transportation, and dependent care.
 
If you plan on obtaining an MBA from a business school or attending law school, you may be eligible for a SoFi student loan to complete your degree. There are no origination fees, late fees, or prepayment penalties, and you can borrow up to the total cost of attendance for your program.
 
If you’re a parent who wants to help your child pay for a degree, SoFi offers parent student loans, too. Like SoFi’s other student loans, there are no origination fees or late fees, and no prepayment penalties. As a SoFi member, you also get access to benefits like career counseling and free financial advisor sessions.
 
Unlike undergraduate and graduate student loans, parent student loans only have two repayment options:
 
To qualify for a student loan from SoFi, SoFi will also perform a credit check. Also, you must meet the following criteria:﻿﻿ 
 
SoFi does have a loan prequalification tool. You can find out if you qualify for a loan online and get a rate estimate without affecting your credit score. Once you choose an interest rate type and repayment term that works for you, you can move forward with the application process. 
 
SoFi student loans have no fees at all, meaning there are no origination fees, application fees, late fees, or prepayment penalties. That’s a significant advantage over some other private lenders and even federal student loans, which often have costly fees.
 
For example, Grad PLUS Loans—federal student loans for graduate and professional borrowers—have a disbursement fee of 4.236%.﻿﻿ If you borrowed $10,000, that means you’d pay $423.60 just to get the money you borrowed. Opting for a private student loan instead could help you save money.
 
SoFi offers two loan discounts: 
 
There are four repayment options for undergraduate, graduate, MBA, and law school student loans: 
 
Parent student loans are only eligible for immediate repayment and interest only repayment.
 
When you take out a SoFi student loan, you become a SoFi member. That gives you access to select benefits, including: 
 
SoFi doesn’t require applicants to have a cosigner for private student loans. However, the company says that rates for undergraduate borrowers are typically higher without a cosigner because they usually have limited credit histories and income. Adding a cosigner to your application can help you secure a loan and get a better interest rate. 
 
An important thing to note is that SoFi didn’t use to offer cosigner releases. Loans disbursed before May 1, 2019, aren’t eligible for cosigner release, but loans disbursed after that date now are.
 SoFi loans issued before May 1, 2019, aren’t eligible for cosigner release 
After making 24 consecutive on-time full principal and interest payments, you can apply for a cosigner release. SoFi will review your information, and if you meet its underwriting and credit requirements, your cosigner may be removed from the loan. 
 
SoFi offers several deferment and forbearance options if you are facing an unexpected hardship and can’t keep up with your payments. 
 
For example, SoFi has an Unemployment Protection Program.﻿﻿ If you lose your job through no fault of your own—such as through company-wide layoffs—you can put your loans into forbearance and postpone making payments on them. You can postpone payments for up to three months at a time, for up to 12 months over the life of your loan. Forbearance may be available in other circumstances, such as medical issues, damage to your home, or a natural disaster.
 
Undergraduate and graduate student loans are eligible for discharge if the borrower passes away or becomes totally and permanently disabled. Parent refinancing loans and parent in-school loans do not qualify for those options. 
 
You can apply and get a credit decision within a few minutes. Once you apply and are approved for a loan, you need to submit supporting documentation and sign your loan documents. 
 
From there, SoFi will send the loan application information to your college for certification. Once SoFi gets that information back from the school, it will schedule the loan disbursement based on the college’s suggested timeline. From the time your application is submitted to loan disbursal can take four to six weeks. 
 
Yes. SoFi offers student loan refinancing for both federal and private student loans. The minimum amount you can refinance is $5,000, but there is no cap on how much you can consolidate. 
 
SoFi doesn’t service its student loans itself. Instead, it uses the Higher Education Loan Authority of the State of Missouri (MOHELA) as its loan servicer. If you take out a loan from SOFI, MOHELA is the entity to which you will make payments and which you should contact if you have questions about your account. 
 
Neither SoFi nor MOHELA are included in the Annual Report of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Private Education Loan Ombudsman.﻿﻿ On TrustPilot, SoFi has more than 2,400 reviews and a four-star rating.﻿﻿ Customer support is available by emailing customerservice@sofi.com or by calling 855-456-7634. 
 
Even if you think a SoFi private student loan is right for you, it’s a good idea to complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). Submitting the FAFSA ensures that you will get all the financial aid you’re entitled to, including gift aid, such as grants. 
 
Once you’ve considered all of your financial aid options, you can move forward with your SoFi student loan application. First, use SoFi’s prequalification tool to get a rate estimate and see what loan terms are available to you. Once you find a loan that’s a good fit, you can complete the full application. You’ll need the following information: 
 SoFi student loans are a good option if you exhausted federal aid. The lender offers competitive interest rates and doesn’t charge added fees. Plus, it offers unemployment protection and forbearance options, giving you an added layer of protection that some other private loan lenders do not. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of student loan lenders. We collected over 45 data points across more than 15 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their education needs.
 SoFi.com. "Private Student Loan Undergrad Rates & Terms." Accessed March 10, 2020. SoFi.com. "Simple student loans that work for you." Accessed March 10, 2020.