
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
  Splash Financial 
Our Take
 
If you have a large loan balance and have struggled to find a lender that doesn’t have a borrowing cap, consider Splash Financial. Splash Financial is an online platform that connects you with multiple lenders. It doesn’t have a loan maximum, and it offers low interest rates and a loan prequalification tool so you can check your eligibility without undergoing a credit check.
 No loan maximum Loan prequalification available Low interest rates Splash Financial allows spouses to refinance their loans together Highly variable loan terms and policies Limited choice of lender Credit union membership may be required Death and disability discharge may not be available  Splash Financial 
Splash Financial operates as an online platform. Specializing in the refinancing of student loans, it's a virtual middleman that pairs borrowers with banks and credit unions. Though a relatively new company, founded in 2013, Splash has handled more than 100,000 accounts and $6 billion in refinancing requests, according to its website. 
 
Refinancing is a tempting proposition: College graduates have $35,620 in student loan debt, on average; ﻿﻿ PLUS Loans disbursed before July 1, 2020, often had an interest rate of above 7% and Stafford Loans as high as 5.05%.﻿﻿ If you’re thinking about refinancing your student debt through Splash Financial, here’s what you need to know. 
 
Splash Financial works with its lending partners to offer refinancing loans with variable and fixed interest rates. Loans fall into two basic categories: general student loans and medical student loans.
 
Whether you have an associate degree, bachelor’s degree, or graduate degree, you can qualify for student loan refinancing through Splash Financial. If you’re married, you and your spouse can refinance your loans together, or one partner can take over the other's debt. Parents who took out educational loans for their child’s education are also eligible for refinancing, and the child doesn’t need to have graduated. 
 Splash Financial is one of the few lenders that offers spouse loan refinancing. Married couples can consolidate their loans and have just one loan to manage. Fixed: 2.63% - 7.27% 
Splash Financial actually began as a refinancer of medical school debt.
 Fixed: 3.75% - 7.48%  
To qualify for student loan refinancing through Splash Financial, you must meet these requirements: 
 
You can use Splash Financial’s prequalification tool to check your rates in as little as three minutes. The process does not affect your credit score. 
 
Splash Financial does not charge application fees, origination fees, or prepayment penalties. 
 
Because your loan is serviced by one of Splash Financial’s partner lenders, whether or not there is a late fee or returned payment fee is dependent on who your lender is. 
 
If you sign up for automatic payments, Splash Financial will apply a 0.25% discount to your APR.
 
With Splash Financial, as with most refinanced student loans, you don’t have multiple repayment options. you begin making principal and interest payments right away. 
 
Splash Financial offers some special grace for its medical school refinancing loans. though. When you refinance your medical school debt, you can pay just $100 per month during the course of your residency or fellowship program plus six months—up to a maximum of 84 months. Once that period expires, you have to make full principal and interest payments on your debt. 
 
If you refer friends or family members to Splash Financial and they refinance their loans, you’ll both receive a $250 cash bonus. There’s no limit to how much you can receive. 
 
If you are refinancing over either $50,000, $100,000 or $200,000 in student loans, you may be eligible for a welcome bonus of $500 or more, depending on the channel partner you sign up through.
 Even if you aren’t a Splash Financial customer yourself, you can earn money with its referral program. If you refer friends or family members to Splash Financial and they refinance their loans, you’ll both get a $250 cash bonus. 
Splash Financial doesn’t require applicants to have a cosigner, but having one may increase your chances of qualifying for a loan. The exact terms of the cosigner agreement depend on the individual lender.
 
Splash Financial works with several different banks and credit unions to offer student loan refinancing, so there isn’t one single financial hardship and forbearance policy. 
 
Before submitting your loan application, check the individual lender’s hardship policies to see if they offer forbearance and loan discharge in the case of death or disability. 
 
Once your application is approved, it can take between three and 14 days for your old loan servicer to receive the loan payoff funds and apply the money to your account. 
 
On TrustPilot, Splash Financial has a 4.4 (out of 5) TrustScore with more than 73 customer reviews.
