
The season for spring landscaping is here, and it’s time to look at what you can do to increase the appeal of your home’s exterior. It’s important to make calculated decisions about your landscaping so that you don’t spend too much, but still make improvements to your lawn. Landscape design can boost the resale value to your home by up to 20%. It can also: 
 
You should invest around 10 percent of your home’s total value in landscape design. You can either do softscape renovations like the installation of plants, shrubs and trees, or more hardscape renovations. Some of the best hardscape landscape renovations are:
 
 Consult with a landscaper. You’ll need to design a plan for the front yard or backyard so you don’t end up destroying everything in the process or spending too much money on the wrong projects.
 
Some of the most worthwhile ways to allocate funds for landscape design center around trees. Depending on how long you plan to live in your home, you can plant trees that will grow over time and provide protection from the sunlight and other elements. You will spend anywhere between $50 and $200 on new trees. Some of the best trees to consider planting are sugar maple, Colorado blue spruce, northern red oak, and eastern red cedar.
 
Remember: if you decide to plant a tree, there will be additional costs for maintenance (i.e. trimming branches and leaf removal), mulching and other care to ensure it grows.
 
There are various outdoor hardscapes you can add to increase the appeal of your home, but the most common are decks and patios. A landscaped patio can increase your home’s value by almost 12%. If you decide to install a patio, you’ll spend between $1,500 and $2,500 on average. You can also erect a deck which more easily blends into the natural landscape or install a water feature like a small pond, swimming pool or hot tub. It’s all about comfort and how well everything harmonizes with the natural landscape.
 
Outdoor lighting can greatly increase the appeal of your home exterior and landscape without requiring you to spend a fortune. It can help accent the beauty of trees, as well as your garden and lawn. You can also increase the security of your lawn by lighting a pathway from the driveway to your door. While it might not seem as helpful during the day, night lighting could be a crucial selling point for potential buyers.
 
Spring landscaping could be the crucial selling point for your home, so it’s important to choose which softscapes and hardscapes in which you want to invest. A landscape professional will usually know which ones work best for your budget and design, so work with them to get the best layout for your spring landscape.
 
Disclaimer: The opinions expressed are those of HomeAdvisor and are subject to change at any time due to changes in market or economic conditions. The comments should not be construed as a recommendation of any individual holdings or market sectors. This material does not constitute any specific legal, tax or accounting advice. Please consult with qualified professionals for this type of advice.
 
Investopedia and HomeAdvisor have or may have had an advertising relationship, either directly or indirectly. This post is not paid for or sponsored by HomeAdvisor, and is separate from any advertising partnership that may exist between the companies. The views reflected within are solely those of HomeAdvisor and their Authors
