
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
State Farm is the largest auto insurance company in the country in terms of direct premiums written.﻿﻿ Founded in 1922, the company offers a wide range of insurance products, including motorcycle, motor home, homeowners, renter’s, and life insurance.
 
With robust coverage options and multiple discounts, State Farm is known for customer service. It has more than 19,000 insurance agents nationwide and commands more than 16% of the private passenger auto insurance market share.
 Multiple policy discounts available Strong third-party ratings Useful mobile app Must submit personal information to get a quote Agent responsiveness variable Rideshare insurance not available in all states 
State Farm offers the following car insurance coverage options:
 
While you can get a quote online, there are several factors that affect your car insurance premiums.
 
State Farm offers multiple discounts that can lower your insurance rates, including:
 
State Farm is licensed in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. However, its rideshare insurance option is not available everywhere. Contact your local State Farm agent to see what coverage options are available in your area.
 
State Farm has more than 19,000 insurance agents nationwide. You can contact agents via phone, by email, or in person during normal business hours. If you need assistance outside business hours, State Farm’s customer service team is available via phone 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
 
State Farm's mobile app has won awards. In 2019 it was the Mobile Web Award winner for best insurance mobile app.﻿﻿ Available for both Android and iOS devices, you can use it to request emergency roadside assistance, file a claim, access your insurance ID cards, and contact your insurance agent.
 
State Farm has a strong reputation in the insurance industry. AM Best, a credit rating agency focused on the insurance industry, gave State Farm an A++ (Superior) Financial Strength rating, its highest. And, as noted above, in J.D. Power’s 2019 U.S. Auto Claims Satisfaction Study, State Farm was ranked fifth out of 23 national car insurers.
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) maintains a database of complaints about insurance companies. Each year the NAIC publishes companies’ complaint ratios, a number that reflects the amount of complaints a company received relative to its market share. Scores of 1.0 are considered average. Anything above 1.0 means the company received more complaints than is typical, while scores below 1.0 mean the reverse. In 2019 State Farm had a complaint ratio of 1.34, meaning it had a worse-than-average complaint ratio.﻿﻿
 For the past three years State Farm has had a slightly worse-than-average complaint ratio than the industry average. 
State Farm offers multiple insurance products, including:
 
You can file a claim via the mobile app, on the company’s website, or by calling your local State Farm agent. If you would like to report a claim over the phone after normal business hours, you can call 800-732-5246.
 
To report a claim, you will be asked to provide: 
 
After you report your claim, State Farm will review the details. It will contact you if it needs additional information and to notify you about next steps. An agent will let you know about your estimate and repair options.
 
You can cancel your State Farm policy without paying a cancellation fee. You can cancel your policy over the phone, in person, or through the mail. You can contact your local agent or call 800-782-8332. When you’re ready to cancel, be prepared to provide your policy number, name, and date of birth.
 
You can get a car insurance quote from State Farm online. To do so, you’ll need to enter the following information about your car and yourself:
 
State Farm will use this information to generate your quote, which you can customize.
 
State Farm is the largest car insurance company in the country, and it offers multiple coverage options and discounts. However, it’s not the best insurance company for everyone. Depending on your location, driving history, and vehicle, State Farm may be more expensive than your other options. Before selecting an insurer, it’s a good idea to compare quotes from multiple companies.
 For drivers looking for a robust insurance company with multiple coverage options, State Farm is hard to beat. Not only does it offer a wide range of auto insurance coverages and discounts; you can also combine your policy with homeowners or renter’s insurance, life insurance, and even pet insurance. State Farm allows you to connect with local agents for personalized assistance, and it has customer service representatives available 24/7 if you need to file a claim or have questions about your policy. It’s an excellent choice for car insurance for many drivers. 
Investopedia is dedicated to furnishing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of car insurance providers. We reviewed each insurance provider’s coverage options, available discounts, customer services, and satisfaction ratings to ensure that our content helps users make the right insurance decision for their needs.
