
Many people find they need to change or correct Social Security information when they get married or divorced and change their names—or need a replacement when they realize they’ve lost their Social Security card or it's been stolen. Some people have never had a card or number and need to apply for the first time. This and other problematic situations have answers. Be advised: Social Security regulations do change yearly.
 
The steps to replace or update your card involve filling out the Social Security Administration’s Form SS-5: Application for a Social Security Card, and gathering supporting documents to prove your age, identity, and citizenship status.﻿﻿
 
Also, follow these steps to get a Social Security card for a child younger than 18 or an adult-dependent—or to apply for your first Social Security card as an adult.
 
Form SS-5 is a one-page form with 18 items. Most of these items will be easy for you to complete. This form can be printed and filled out by hand or filled out on a PDF form and then printed.
 
It is also possible to request a replacement card online, provided you're making no other changes. This service is available in all states except Alabama, Nevada, Ohio, Oregon, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, and West Virginia.﻿﻿
 
Here's how to complete the 18 items on the form:﻿﻿
 
Once you’ve completed the form, you’ll need to gather the documents you’re required to submit with the form to prove your identity, age, and citizenship status, those of the person you’re applying for a card on behalf of, or both. These documents typically include the following:
 
The Social Security Administration will only accept originals or copies that are certified by the agency that issued the original. You can’t use photocopies, even notarized ones. The agency also requires you to submit at least two documents, even if one of your documents (for example, your passport) can serve more than one purpose.﻿﻿
 
The final step is to mail the form and your original or certified documents to your local Social Security office or card center. You can find the address online at the Social Security website using its zip code search tool.﻿﻿ The office or center will mail your original documents back to you along with your new Social Security card.
 If you are mailing your documents to the Social Security Administration, get a certified copy of your driver's license from your state department of motor vehicles instead of sending the original. 
Your other option is to take the form and your original documents to the office yourself, which eliminates the possibility that sensitive personal documents like your original birth certificate will get lost or stolen in the mail.
 
Also, if you make an appointment to go to an office, you can use your driver’s license as one of your supporting documents, but if you’re mailing your documents, you won’t want to send your original driver’s license. Get a certified copy of your driver’s license from your state department of motor vehicles, send your passport (also a risky idea), or call your nearest Social Security office and ask what identity document they will accept instead.
 
Generally, the SSA will take 10-14 business days to process your application.﻿﻿
 
The steps to replace or update your Social Security card aren’t complicated, but they do take time and attention to detail. Scheduling an appointment to visit the office in person can be a hassle, there is some risk involved in sending the documents in the mail, and it may be a more challenging process if you don’t have originals of required supporting documents like your birth certificate.
 Social Security Administration. "How do I apply for a new or replacement Social Security number card?" Accessed Feb. 19, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Request a Replacement Social Security Number (SSN) Card Online." Accessed Feb. 19, 2020. Social Security Administration. "SS-5: Application for a Social Security Card." Accessed Feb. 19, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Learn what documents you will need to get a Social Security Card." Accessed Feb. 19, 2020. Social Security Administration. "SS-5: Application for a Social Security Card." Page 1. Accessed Feb. 19, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Social Security Office Locator." Accessed Feb. 19, 2020. Social Security Administration. "How long will it take to get a Social Security card?" Accessed Feb. 19, 2020.