
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) reports that more than 80 million taxpayers use paid professionals to complete and submit their tax returns.﻿﻿ If you're one of these individuals, it is important to organize your receipts, forms and other documents well before tax time. Your preparer may take information directly from you or ask you to complete a questionnaire. Either way, you'll need time to gather everything you—and your preparer—will need. Here are the steps to take.
 
If you don’t have a tax preparer yet, a good way to find one is to ask friends and advisors (such as an attorney you know) for referrals. Be sure that the person you choose has a Preparer Tax Identification Number (PTIN) showing that they are authorized to prepare federal income tax returns.﻿﻿
 
You should also inquire about fees, which are likely to depend on the complexity of your return. Avoid using a firm that intends to take a percentage of your refund. The IRS website has tips for choosing a preparer and a link to the IRS directory of preparers, which you can search according to their credentials and location.
 
The sooner you meet with your preparer, the sooner you should be able to complete your return (even if you decide to file for an extension, as discussed later). If you anticipate a refund, you'll get that sooner, too. If you wait too long to schedule an appointment with a tax preparer, it might not happen before April 15, and you could miss out on opportunities to lower your tax bill, such as making deductible contributions to an IRA or a health savings account.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ Note: for 2020, the deadlines for making these contributions and for filing taxes is July 15.﻿﻿
 
By the end of January, you should have received all the various tax documents that you need from your employer or employers, as well as from banks, brokerage firms, and others with whom you do business. For each form, check that the information matches your own records.
 
These are some of the most common forms:
 
Which receipts you'll need to provide depends on whether you itemize your deductions or claim the standard deduction. You'll want to choose whichever produces the greater write-off, but the only way to know for sure is to add up your itemized deductions and compare that with your standard deduction. For the 2019 tax year, the standard deduction for single taxpayers is $12,200 and for married couples filing jointly it is $24,400. For 2020, these amounts rise to $12,400 for single taxpayers and $24,800 for married couples filing jointly.﻿﻿
 
In particular, look for receipts for medical costs not covered by insurance or reimbursed by any other health plan (like a flexible spending account or health savings account), property taxes, and investment-related expenses). These are all subject to limits, but if they're substantial enough, it may be worth your while to itemize.
 
If you do itemize your deductions, you'll also need to collect any back-up you have for charitable contributions. For example, contributions of $250 or more require a written acknowledgment from the charity stating the amount of your gift and that you did not receive anything (other than perhaps a token item) in return.﻿﻿ If you don't have such an acknowledgment, contact the charity and request it. You can find more details on charitable deductions in IRS Publication 1771.
 
If you have business income and expenses to report on Schedule C, you will need to share your books and records (for example, QuickBooks or any other accounting system you use, receipts for expenses, and relevant bank and credit card statements).﻿﻿ The better organized your records are, the less time it will take a preparer to process your taxes, which translates into lower fees for their service.
 
You probably know your Social Security number, but do you know the Social Security number of each dependent you claim? You'll want to jot those down, along with any other information your tax preparer is likely to need. For example, if you own a vacation home or rental property, note their addresses. If you sold a property in the past year, note the dates you bought and sold, the amount you originally paid, and how much you received from the sale.
 
If you need more time to complete all of these tasks, you can request an extension to October 15 for filing your tax return. However, you'll still have to estimate the amount of tax you owe and pay that amount by the regular April 15 deadline to avoid penalties.﻿﻿ Note, for 2020, requests for an extension must be received by July 15, and estimated taxes should be paid by then to avoid interest and penalties.﻿﻿
 For 2020, the deadline for filing taxes and making deductible contributions to an IRA or health savings account has been moved to July 15.﻿﻿ 
If you expect a tax refund, you have several options for how it's handled.
 
You can also split your refund among the direct deposit choices by completing Form 8888.﻿﻿ You'll need to let your tax preparer know what you want to do, so that can be indicated on your return.
 
If you use the same preparer that you used last year, they are likely to have your previous information. If you use a new preparer, last year’s return can serve as a reminder to the preparer—and you—of some items you don’t want to overlook. Here are two examples:
 
Whether you do your own taxes or hire someone else to handle it, keeping good records will save you time and, in the case of a paid preparer, money. The earlier you start, the more smoothly it should go, and the sooner you'll have put the process behind you for another year.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Filing Season Statistics for Week Ending December 27, 2019." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Directory of Federal Tax Return Preparers with Credentials and Select Qualifications." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - IRA Contribution Limits." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 969: Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Filing and Payment Deadlines Questions and Answers." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "W-2." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "1099-DIV." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "1099-INT." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "1099-MISC." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "1099-B." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "General Instructions for Certain Information Returns (2019)." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "1098." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "W-2G." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "IRS provides tax inflation adjustments for tax year 2020." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Charitable Contributions - Written Acknowledgments." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "2019 Instructions for Schedule C." Accessed April 17, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Extension of Time To File Your Tax Return." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 152 Refund Information." Accessed Jan. 31, 2020.