
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
SunTrust Bank, which merged with fellow regional bank BB&T to create a new bank known as Truist in 2019, is now positioned as the sixth-largest bank in the United States, with a combined $442 billion in assets.﻿﻿ Despite the merger, however, SunTrust and BB&T have retained their own branding and products. SunTrust offers an array of banking products with unusual perks to customers in 10 southeastern states and the District of Columbia. Here’s what you need to know about SunTrust to decide if it’s the right bank for you.
 Seamless integration with digital payment applications Multiple ways to earn cash back and other perks Online, mobile, and text-based banking available Only available in southeastern U.S. Website not completely transparent Low interest rates 
SunTrust will be the right bank for customers looking for perks with their basic checking and savings options. It may be a particularly good fit for those who:
 
SunTrust has a wide array of banking products for its customers. These include:
 
This basic savings account can be a good way for new savers to get acclimated to the habit of setting money aside. SunTrust’s Essential Savings account offers no interest, but it also has no minimum deposit and no monthly fees whatsoever (provided you opt out of receiving paper statements, which cost $3 per month).
 
In addition, having an Essential Savings account gives you access to a 10% Loyalty Cash Bonus with a SunTrust Rewards credit card. You just need to redeem your cash back into a SunTrust Essential Savings account (or any other SunTrust deposit account) to receive the additional 10% loyalty bonus.
 Though overdraft protection is free, signing up for the Overdraft Assurance line of credit will trigger a $7 per month fee for the service. This $7 fee will be debited from your checking account each month. 
The Essential Checking account requires a $100 minimum deposit to open and comes with a $7 monthly maintenance fee. However, you can have the fee waived by doing one of the following:
 
You will be subject to an overdraft fee of $36 if you overdraw your Essential Checking account, and you may be subject to up to six overdraft fees per day. However, this account comes with Default Decline, which means the account is set up to decline any ATM or one-time debit card transactions that may overdraw your account.
 
You may also opt for the Transactions Paid Option, which will authorize a one-time debit card purchase or ATM transaction when there is not enough money available in the account, though it will also trigger the $36 overdraft fee. You may instead choose overdraft protection and link your Essential Checking account to another SunTrust deposit account, credit card, personal line of credit, or Overdraft Assurance line of credit to cover overdrafts, with a fee of $12.50 per transfer.
 
Essential Checking account holders are also eligible for the 10% Loyalty Cash Bonus with a SunTrust Cash Rewards credit card.
 
There are three tiers of the Advantage Checking account at SunTrust, although all three offer 0.01% annual percentage yield (APY) on your balance. Like the non-interest-bearing Essential Checking account, Advantage Checking requires a $100 minimum deposit to open. All three tiers of Advantage Checking have a $20 per month maintenance fee that can be waived in one of the following ways:
 
There are a number of perks that all three tiers of Advantage Checking share. These include a starter pack of 100 checks, access to up to four Essential Checking accounts with the monthly maintenance fees waived, three out-of-network ATM fees waived per billing cycle, SunTrust fees waived on incoming wire transfers, and free money orders and official checks.
 
The big benefit of Advantage Checking, however, is the Loyalty Cash Bonus, and that’s where you see the difference among the three tiers. The first tier, Advantage, is when you carry a balance between $0 and $25,000, and it means you receive the 10% Loyalty Cash Bonus with a SunTrust Cash Rewards credit card. You reach the Advantage Choice tier when your balance is between $25,000 and $100,000, which makes you eligible for a Loyalty Cash Bonus of 25%. Reach the Advantage Preferred Tier with a balance of $100,000 or more and you are eligible for a 50% Loyalty Cash Bonus.
 
SunTrust offers two CDs. The Personal CD is a traditional CD, requiring a minimum deposit of $2,000 and available in terms ranging from seven days to 10 years. However, when we called customer service on May 20, 2020, to determine the CD rates (as they are not all listed online), Investopedia was not provided with rates for all terms. Here are the rates that are available online in Texas as of June 16, 2020.
 
SunTrust also offers the Advantage CD, which provides one penalty-free withdrawal per term and also allows CD holders to continue to add funds to the principal after the account has been opened. The Advantage CD has a $1,000 minimum deposit and is only available in a one-year term.
 
The Advantage CD also offers higher interest rates if you set up a recurring monthly automatic transfer of at least $50.
 
You have your choice of four different MasterCard credit card options with SunTrust, each geared toward a different consumer need. Every card on this list qualifies you for a Loyalty Cash Bonus if you have your cash-back rewards deposited into a SunTrust deposit account.
 
SunTrust also offers the following products in addition to those listed above:
 
SunTrust’s customer service line is available for automated service 24 hours a day at 1-800-786-8787, and the website offers a full menu of service options to help any banking customers needing assistance at any time of the day or night. However, the lack of transparency on the site extends to customer service information. For instance, the site does not provide information on what hours the call center is open to reach an actual human customer service rep.
 
SunTrust’s app, however, is well rated on both the Apple and Google Play stores, at 4.1 and 4.4 respectively.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ J.D. Power also notes that SunTrust has high satisfaction rankings among customers but was not included in the 2019 National Banking Satisfaction Study because its merger with BB&T (which is also highly rated) had not yet completed at the time of the study.﻿﻿
 
SunTrust makes it very easy to open an account online. Customers living in one of the 10 states served by the bank (and the District of Columbia) can also drop into one of the 1,406 branches or stop at one of the more than 2,000 ATMs for their transactions. The mobile banking options also make it easy for SunTrust customers to bank on the go, including using digital payment apps and text-banking.
