
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Super Home Warranty  
Super Home Warranty is a newer home warranty company that offers three different coverage plans for homeowners who want help with home maintenance and other items. Premiums are more expensive than some other providers, and coverage is only available in a handful of cities around the United States.
 Based on our review of over a dozen home warranty companies, Super Home Warranty was not one of the best companies we found. To see other options that may be better, visit our list of the best home warranty companies. Offers routine maintenance services One service fee per repair or breakdown Mobile app available to manage policy and home maintenance reminders Only available in Washington, D.C. and select cities in five states Higher pricing for plans Low ratings from customers 
Founded in 2014 and headquartered in San Francisco, Super Home Warranty is a home repair and maintenance service that works on a subscription model. It stands out among its competitors by offering services such as the option to store home data digitally, home maintenance reminders, a mobile app, and the ability to earn rewards every time you refer a friend who signs up with the company.
 
Currently, homeowners and real estate plans are available to residents in Washington, D.C., and select cities in Arizona, Illinois, Maryland, Virginia, and Texas.
 Super Home Warranty  
Founded in 2014, Super Home Warranty offers different plans for both homeowners and real estate professionals. It operates on a subscription model and includes routine home maintenance tasks. This helps it to stand out among other companies that only offer home warranty plans for repairing or replacing items.
 
Super Home Warranty is very transparent with terms and pricing on its website, but costs tend to be on the higher end compared to industry standards. The company has few customer complaints, though it is a newer company.
 Coverage is only available in Washington, D.C. and some cities in Arizona, Illinois, Maryland, Virginia, and Texas. 
To help you make an informed decision, we’ve researched and compiled the most relevant information on Super Home Warranty including pricing, coverage, options, caps, and more.
 
Super Home Warranty offers three different plans: Simple, Signature, and Lux. All plans offer a specific amount of coverage and home maintenance tasks—each time you request service there’s a $75 trade service fee (an out-of-pocket amount you’ll need to pay), which Super refers to as its copay. The waiting period to start coverage is 15 days, shorter than the industry average of 30.
 
The It’s Covered Upgrade is included in the Signature and Lux plans and offers coverage for heating, indoor plumbing, water heater, enhanced stoppage coverage, indoor electrical, range/cooktop/oven, lining dishwasher, microwave oven, garage door, permits and code upgrades, refrigerant recapture and disposal, structural modifications to accommodate replacement equipment, and equipment disposal.
 
Optional coverage is available for an additional fee if certain items are not covered in a specific plan. This could include things such as smart home devices, water softeners, and a guesthouse.
 
Four real estate plans are available for realtors in the escrow process: Secure, Signature, Lux, and New Construction. (New Construction plans require a custom quote.) Like plans for homeowners, the trade service call fee for all plans is $75. Optional coverage is the same as homeowner plans. There is no waiting period for plans purchased through real estate professionals with policies lasting for 12 months.
 
Information on coverage and pricing for New Construction plans aren’t available online—you’ll need to contact Super Home Warranty at 844-557-8737. Since newly constructed homes offer their own warranties depending on the builder, Super Home Warranty will work with you to offer a customized plan to fill the gaps.
 
Homeowner plans offer pricing for condos under 1,500 square feet to homes ranging from 1,500 to 15,000 square feet. The trade service call fee is $75 for all plans.
 Super Home Warranty premiums are higher than some competitors. 
The pricing below is for homeowner plans with single-family homes from 1,500 to 5,000 square feet.
 
Optional pricing is the same for all states and is available for plans that don’t already include the item.
 
Super Home Warranty doesn’t have a long list of exclusions compared to other companies. As an example, Super Home Warranty doesn’t cover meat probe accessories for stoves, but it does include glass top burners that aren't covered by many other companies. Coverage and exclusions for components such as ductwork are pretty standard—breaks in connections are covered but not improperly sized ones. For a full list of exclusions, visit the website’s terms of coverage page. 
 
Payout caps differ depending on the item covered and the plan purchased. Super Home Warranty is transparent on what is covered and what isn't—many items provide unlimited coverage, which is better than industry standards.
 
Below is a sampling of the company’s payout caps.
 
Visit Super Home Warranty’s pricing page to see a comprehensive list of payout caps and limitations.
 
During its regular business hours, Super Home Warranty will respond to your service claim within four business hours. Expect a response within 48 hours during weekends and holidays. For emergency services, there will be reasonable efforts made to expedite the timeline—there is a 24-hour emergency service for flooding.
 
Super Home Warranty has an online chat feature where you can ask questions. To make a claim, you can do so via the mobile app or by calling 844-997-8737 during business hours (9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Pacific Standard Time). The phone number for the after-hours service is 415-445-2109.
 
As a relatively new company, there aren’t many ratings (35) so far, though it has been an accredited business with the Better Business Bureau since 2016 and has a B rating.﻿﻿ The majority of complaints reference issues with delays in service.
