
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
Bad credit often limits credit card options, but the Surge Mastercard offers qualified applicants an unsecured credit card without a hefty security deposit. However, the high fees and lack of rewards may make exploring alternative options worthwhile.
 The Surge Mastercard is not one of our top-rated credit cards for bad credit. You can review our list of the best credit cards for bad credit for what we think are better options. Potential unsecured card access Monthly reporting to three major credit bureaus Sky-high fees Security deposit may be required Higher-than-average APR on purchases No rewards 
While cards for people with bad credit tend to charge fees, the Surge Mastercard’s fees are higher than you’d usually expect. If you’re looking for a credit card that is less expensive, consider the Petal credit card. It charges no annual fees, foreign transaction fees, monthly maintenance fees, or additional card fees, and it doesn’t require a credit check for applicants without an established credit history. 
 
According to Experian, one of the three major credit bureaus, 33% of Americans have a FICO score in the “very poor” to “fair” range, meaning their scores are between 300 and 669. If your credit score falls into those categories, you may struggle to get approved for a credit card, and you may be limited to a secured card. 
 
Secured cards often require security deposits of hundreds of dollars. If you don’t want to put down a security deposit, the Surge Mastercard may be an alternative. Depending on your credit, you could qualify for this card without a security deposit, giving you access to an unsecured line of credit. 
 
However, this card does charge a lot of fees. And, unlike a secured card’s security deposit, these fees aren’t refundable. Because of those drawbacks, the Surge Mastercard is only a good option for people who intend to use it as a short-term credit-building tool. Once you can qualify for a credit card with fewer fees, you can close your account. 
 
The card offers a few standard benefits, including: 
 
Surge Mastercard is issued by Celtic Bank, which is owned by Continental Finance. This company specializes in issuing credit cards to consumers who have less-than-perfect credit. Continental Finance was founded in 2005 and, according to its own reporting, manages over 2.6 million credit cards. 
