
Yes, you can withdraw money from your individual retirement account (IRA) while you're still working. However, you may not want to—for three main reasons.
 
The first is the tax penalty imposed by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). If you take money out of a traditional IRA before age 59½, you’ll usually pay a 10% federal tax penalty and may also possibly face state tax penalties.﻿﻿
 
Early withdrawals without penalty are allowed only in the following situations:
 
If you have a Roth IRA, you can take out your contributions at any time without penalty, as you’ve already paid tax on the contributions.
 
However, you cannot remove any of the earnings without paying a penalty before age 59½. The exceptions: If you become disabled or if you make a qualified first-time home purchase (for which you can only withdraw up to $10,000).
 
There is also a five-year requirement, meaning that if you want to withdraw earnings tax-free and penalty-free for one of these two approved early withdrawal purposes, your Roth account must be in existence for at least five years.﻿﻿
 
The second is taxes. You pay taxes on the amount withdrawn from a traditional IRA regardless of your age because your contributions were made in pre-tax dollars.
 
Your tax rate while you’re working might be higher than your tax rate in retirement, so it can cost you more in taxes to take a traditional IRA distribution while you’re still working.
 
The third is the harm you might cause to your long-term financial plan. Any money you withdraw early is not just money you won’t have later; it’s money on which you will not earn years of compound returns you could have racked up. The loss can end up being quite substantial.
 Alina Parizianu, CFP®, MBAMMBB Financial Services, Great Neck, NY The fact that you are working doesn’t impact your eligibility to take a distribution, but there may be certain taxes and penalties. For a traditional IRA, you have to pay income tax on the withdrawal. If you are under age 59½, you will also pay a 10% penalty, subject to some exceptions. If the account is a Roth IRA, the distribution is made after five years from the first contribution, and the owner is 59½ years old, the distribution is tax- and penalty-free. If, however, one of the above conditions is not met, distributions are subject to the following: Distributions must be taken in the following order: contributions, conversions, and earnings. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "IRA FAQs - Distributions (Withdrawals)." Accessed May 21, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Retirement Topics - Hardship Distributions." Accessed May 21, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Designated Roth Accounts - Distributions." Accessed May 21, 2020.