
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
TD Bank is a bank with roots dating back 150 years. A subsidiary of the Canadian Toronto Dominion Bank, TD Bank’s U.S. headquarters is in Chapel Hill, N.C. It currently boasts more than 9 million customers and has 1,250 brick-and-mortar locations along the East Coast.
 Most of the nearly 1,300 locations are open on the weekends. There are no foreign transaction fees on a debit card. TD Simple Savings starts at 0.05% APY. Other banks offer higher rates.  You need to maintain a high balance to waive the monthly account fees. In the fall of 2019 TD Bank signed onto a $70 million settlement of lawsuits. It was accused of charging its customers excessive overdraft fees. TD agreed to pay customers $43 million and cancel $27 million in overdraft fees. 
TD Bank should appeal to a wide range of customers who want after-hours customer service. It might be a good fit if you:
 
As you might expect of a large financial institution, TD bank offers a wide range of services and types of accounts:
 
There are two savings accounts to choose from: TD Simple Savings and TD Beyond Savings. With TD Simple Savings, all balances earn 0.05% APY. There’s a $5 monthly fee, which can be waived if you do one of the following:
 
The TD Beyond Savings are for those who keep high balances of $20,000 or more in their savings accounts. The downside is that you'll need to maintain a high balance to earn a bit of interest or have the monthly maintenance fee waived. If you keep less than $20,000, you'll earn 0.10% APY. However, keep $20,000 and you get a rate bump of 0.50% APY.
 
Other incentives to keep a high bank balance in your account include reimbursement of out-of-network ATM fees when you maintain a $2,500 balance. And if you keep a $20,000 minimum daily balance or sync up your savings account to a TD checking account, the $15 monthly maintenance fee is waived.
 
TD Convenience Checking might be suited for those who aren't looking for an account to earn interest and typically don't keep a high balance in their account. The $15 monthly maintenance fee is waived if you keep at least $100 in your account balance or are between the ages of 17 through 23. There's also no minimum amount to open an account.
 
TD Beyond Checking has no monthly maintenance fees if you do one of the following: get monthly deposits of $5,000 or more, have an average daily balance of $2,500, or have a combined total of $25,000 across eligible TD Bank accounts. Otherwise, you'll be required to pay the $25 monthly bank fee.
 
Other noteworthy perks include free basic checks and reimbursement of up to two overdraft fees a year. Also, any fees incurred with a rush bill payment will be covered. You'll also get reimbursed for fees tacked onto one outgoing wire—domestic or international—per statement cycle. However, you'll probably be able to find a higher APY elsewhere. The current APY is as follows:
 
 If you're looking for a no-frills checking account, the TD Simple Checking has a $5.99 monthly maintenance fee no matter how much you have sitting in the bank. You get just the basics with this checking account, such as free online statements and free access to TD's mobile bank app.
 
Young folks between the ages of 17 to 23 are eligible to open a Student Checking account. TD Bank's Student Checking features no minimum balance and no monthly maintenance fees. The no-account fee bleeds over to a linked Simple Savings account if you're age 24 or under.
 
For those 60 and up, TD Plus 60 Checking features free checks, statements, and money orders. Also, the $10 monthly maintenance fee will be dropped as long as you keep an average daily balance of $250.﻿﻿ 
 In the fall of 2019 TD Bank signed onto a $70 million settlement of lawsuits. It was accused of charging its customers excessive overdraft fees. TD agreed to pay customers $43 million and cancel $27 million in overdraft fees. 
The TD Growth Money Market Account offers a rate bump if you set up a monthly recurring transfer of at least $50 from an eligible TD account. While there's a $12 monthly maintenance fee, you can skip the fee if you do one of the following:
 
The rates are as follows:
 
TD Bank offers tiered interest rates depending on the deposit amount. You get a rate bump if you link your CD to an eligible TD Bank checking account. The minimum deposit required is $250. Here are TD Bank’s higher-than-standard rates if you link your CD to a checking account and the CD balance is anywhere from $250 to $9,999:
 
The penalties for early withdrawals depend on how early you take out your money. If you make a withdrawal during the first seven to 89 days after you open an account, you lose all interest earned. Make a withdrawal anywhere from 90 days to one year of opening your account, and you lose three months' worth of interest.
 
If you're concerned about needing to take money out before your CD matures, TD Bank offers two options for greater flexibility. The first is a TD No-Catch CD, which features one penalty-free early withdrawal per term. You'll need a $250 deposit to open, and there's no minimum monthly maintenance fee.﻿﻿
 
If you're afraid of getting locked into a CD and need to pull money prematurely, enter TD Bank's TD Step Rate CD. The TD Step Rate CD offers one withdrawal each anniversary, sans the penalty fee.
 
TD Bank offers a handful of credit cards, including cash bank cards, credit cards designed for travelers, and small business credit cards.
 
Cash-Back Credit Cards 
 
Traveler Credit Cards 
 
Business Credit Cards 
 
Secured Credit Cards
 
TD Bank also has a wide range of other offerings:﻿﻿
 
Like many large banks, TD Bank offers the ability to bank 24/7 online or via the bank app. You can also call their customer service line at 1-888-751-9000. You can manage your bank accounts, set up autopay for your bills, deposit checks, and schedule transfers. You also can send money to friends and family through Zelle. To keep tabs on banking activity, you can set up email alerts.
 
Many of its brick-and-mortar locations offer hours on nights and weekends. So if you're too busy to swing by during the weekdays, you can do so at your convenience.
 
According to the J.D. Power National Banking study, TD Bank ranks highest in customer satisfaction. On a 1,000-point scale, TD bank had an overall satisfaction score of 851 points.﻿﻿
 
You can sign up for an account online or by visiting one of its nearly 1,300 physical locations.
 TD Bank is worth considering if you're looking for a bank with great customer service and a few options for checking at different stages of your life. However, if you’re looking for a bank in which to park your money to earn interest, the rates are quite low. You can find more-competitive rates elsewhere. What's more, you’ll need to mind the minimum required balances for the monthly bank account fee to be dropped. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Customercares4u.com. "What Are TD Bank Hours of Operation?" Accessed March 19, 2020. TD.com. "TD Bank Savings & Money Market Accounts." Accessed March 19, 2020. TD.com. "TD Bank Checking Accounts." Accessed March 19, 2020. TD.com. "TD Bank CDs." Accessed March 19, 2020. TD.com. "TD Bank Credit Cards." Accessed March 19, 2020. TD.com. "TD Simple Savings." Accessed March 19, 2020.