
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
TD Bank, self-described as America's most convenient bank, has been in business for more than 150 years. It has locations along the East Coast and offers a range of banking products, including personal loans.
 
TD Bank's personal loans may be a competitive option for borrowers with good to excellent credit. The bank offers both secured and unsecured loans with limited fees and competitive interest rates. Our review covers everything you need to know before applying.
 Quick funding with TD Express loan Low or no origination fees Prequalification available High credit score required Not available nationwide $2,000 minimum loan 
TD Bank personal loan borrowers experiencing financial hardship due to coronavirus can delay payments and request fees waived or refunded on their account.﻿﻿
 
TD Bank offers four loan options. You can choose between its TD Express loan, unsecured loan, unsecured line of credit, and secured loan. ﻿﻿
 
If you’re looking for quick access to cash, you can receive the funds from a TD Express loan within 48 hours of applying. The unsecured personal loan, unsecured line of credit, and the secured loan will take longer. After completing those applications, you will hear from a lending specialist within one business day. The application review may take a few days. You will receive the money in person by check when you sign the paperwork, according to a TD Bank representative. ﻿﻿
 
You can apply for a TD Bank personal loan online, by phone, or in person at one of its branches. Keep in mind that there will be a hard inquiry on your credit after submitting an application, which will temporarily lower your score. You need the following to complete an application:﻿﻿
 
There are six steps to complete the application:﻿﻿
 
If you're looking for a better interest rate, you can indirectly refinance with TD Bank, according to a representative. TD Bank won't make payments to another company on your behalf, though. Once you have a TD Bank personal loan, you can re-apply for a better rate in the future.
 If your credit score is 660 or above and you qualify for TD Bank's lowest interest rates, the lender's personal loan may be a good option. For borrowers that need money fast, the TD Express loan could be attractive. But if you need a loan up to $50,000, the unsecured personal loan may be worth considering. Both options allow you to avoid origination and prepayment fees. 