
For families on the long road to saving for college, prepaid tuition plans can be an attractive option, allowing them to pay future tuition bills at today's presumably lower rates. But such plans have become a rare commodity.
 
While 22 states used to offer them, that number has dwindled to just 11 as of 2020—and two of those states aren't currently accepting new enrollees, pending changes to their plans.﻿﻿ Here's a rundown of which prepaid tuition plans exist, where you can still find them, and whether they may be a good choice for you.
 
Prepaid tuition plans are a type of 529 plan. They allow families to pay for college tuition at current rates, even if the student doesn't attend college for years. Timing and age are crucial factors with prepaid tuition plans—most require participating in the plan for at least three years before the money can be used. The beneficiary must be no more than 15 years old when the account is opened.
 
A prepaid tuition program may be used to pay for future college tuition at any of the sponsoring state's eligible colleges or universities—or provide a proportional payment to private or out-of-state institutions. The program does this by pooling and investing the plan's funds, aiming to make enough money to exceed the pace of rising state college tuition. Essentially, you're lending your money to the state's plan in return for the locked-in tuition rate. You can make contributions in regular installments or with a lump sum.﻿﻿
 
It is important to note, however, that prepaid plans may be the right choice only if you are absolutely certain the student will attend an in-state school. While most of the plans do allow funds to be used for out-of-state college tuition, there is often an accompanying penalty and the plan may not cover the full cost.﻿﻿
 
The 11 states listed here either offer prepaid tuition plans that are open to new enrollment or have temporarily suspended enrollment, while they await legislative action or the introduction of a replacement plan. Other states that once offered prepaid tuition plans continue to honor their obligations to past enrollees.
 
Note that these plans vary in terms of their guarantees, residency requirements, and other details.
 Currently closed to new enrollment pending legislative action.﻿﻿   
Prepaid tuition plans aren't the only ways for parents to save. States offer other plans that allow people to put money away for their children's college expenses. The other, more common type of 529 plan is the college savings plan. This plan doesn't promise to pay future tuition but simply allows you to save money for post-secondary or K-12 education for a designated beneficiary. That money may be used to pay for tuition as well as other qualified higher education expenses, including room and board, books, and related costs.﻿﻿ This allows account holders to decide where to allocate these funds.
 
College savings 529 plans are also run by the states, but the money in them can be used for any college in any state. If the student decides not to go to college at all, the account owner—typically the student's parent—can change the beneficiary to another relative, or withdraw the money and pay income tax plus a 10% penalty on the account's earnings. It may also be possible to change the beneficiary or to receive a refund of your contributions, but not their earnings with a prepaid tuition plan.﻿﻿
 
Like 529 college savings plans, prepaid tuition plans have tax advantages. You may be eligible to take a state income tax deduction for the money you contribute to the plan. Your later withdrawals can also be tax-free as long as the money goes toward paying tuition or paying off a student loan. If you choose the latter option, there's a limit to how much you can use to pay off the loan—a maximum of $10,000.﻿﻿
 A 529 college savings plan, which all 50 states and the District of Columbia offer, is more flexible than a prepaid tuition plan and can be used for a wider range of expenses. 
If you don't live in one of the states listed above—those that allow residents to take part in a prepaid tuition plan—don't fret. There is an option available to you as well. The Private College 529 Plan isn't run by a state, allowing account holders to lock in tuition rates at close to 300 private colleges and universities in more than 30 states and the District of Columbia. Because the plan isn't run by any particular state and by the schools themselves, anyone can invest. The full list of schools and details on how the plan works can be found on the plan's website.﻿﻿
 Edvisors. "Prepaid Tuition Plans -- Listed by States." Accessed June 3, 2020. U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission. "An Introduction to 529 Plans." Accessed June 3, 2020. Capital Group. "What you need to know about 529 education savings plans." Accessed June 3, 2020. Private College 529 Plan. "Participating Schools." Accessed June 3. 2020.