
The 401(k) plan, since its inception in 1978, has been become the most popular employer-sponsored retirement plan in the U.S.﻿﻿ But not all workers have access to one, leaving them to seek out alternatives to save for retirement.
 
So what else is out there? There are several options. But first, let's take a look at how a 401(k) works.
 
The setup is simple. With a 401(k), you contribute pretax money from your paycheck every month. Contributions are tax-deductible from your annual income. The money is automatically deducted from your paycheck and invested in the investments you choose from the plan's options.
 
Even better is if your employer matches some percentage of your contributions, which many do. You get the proceeds of the investments when you retire.﻿﻿
 
There are limits to how much you can contribute annually. As of 2020, you can contribute up to $19,500 per year (up from $19,000 in 2019) and savers are allowed an additional $6,500 if you're 50 and older.﻿﻿
 
While a 401(k) can run on autopilot once you've got it established, this isn't typically a good idea. If, for example, your salary doubles and you're still contributing the same amount every month, you're putting yourself at a disadvantage by not increasing contributions.
 
For those looking for alternatives to a 401(k) consider exploring the possibilities below.
 
If your employer doesn't offer a 401(k)—or you are self-employed or a small business owner—you can open an individual retirement account (IRA). These accounts also offer retirement-oriented tax advantages, which differ depending on whether you choose a traditional or Roth IRA.
 
Even better, you can save in one in addition to a 401(k), though—depending on your income and the type of account you choose—your contributions may not be tax deductible. Even in that case, however, the money in your account will grow tax-free until retirement.
 
Though both IRAs and 401(k)s offer tax benefits, there are some key differences. With an IRA, the most you can contribute in both 2019 and 2020 is $6,000 a year ($7,000 if you're at least 50).﻿﻿
 In general, 401(k)s and IRAs have an early withdrawal penalty if you take distributions before age 59½, but there are exceptions to this rule. 
With an IRA, the world is your investment oyster. You can invest in just about any security or financial instrument whose value can be measured precisely and daily.
 
What it doesn't include are life insurance and collectibles. "Collectibles would be categorized as any work of art, metal, gem, alcoholic beverage, rug, antique, or stamp," explains Rebecca Dawson, a financial advisor in Los Angeles, Calif.
 
"The IRA is a great investment vehicle. However, more than 85% of investors aren’t aware of all the benefits that an IRA provides. It allows you to invest in stocks, bonds, and mutual funds, but it also allows you to invest in real estate, horses, private company stock, tax liens, farmland, cryptocurrency, franchises, physical gold, and more," says Kirk Chisholm, wealth manager at Innovative Advisory Group in Lexington, Mass.
 
Like 401(k)s, IRAs come in both traditional and Roth versions. Do you want to pay taxes now, or later?
 
With a traditional IRA, you deduct the contributions from your taxes today, and you only pay income taxes when you start withdrawing—decades down the road.
 
With a Roth IRA, you don't get to deduct the contributions from your annual tax bill, but once you start withdrawing, it's all tax-free. Any growth is tax-free, too. You also are spared required minimum distributions when you hit age 70½, which are mandated for traditional IRAs and for 401(k)s.﻿﻿
 
When deciding between a traditional or Roth IRA you do have to ask yourself if you're going to be in a higher tax bracket once you retire, and if the tax brackets in the future will bear any resemblance to today's.
 
If you are self-employed or a small business owner you may also have the option to open a simplified employee pension (SEP IRA) if you qualify. SEP IRAs operate much like traditional IRAs in terms of tax advantages and investment options. They have the additional benefit of higher contribution limits.﻿﻿
 
As of 2020, contributions cannot exceed 25% of compensation for the year or $57,000 (up from $56,000 in 2019), whichever is less.﻿﻿
 
If you're self-employed and successful, but were too busy—or too low on cash—to do much about building up a retirement plan earlier in your life, there's still time to do something to secure your future. A cash-balance defined-benefit plan will let you play instant retirement catch-up.
 
Robert R. Schulz, CFP®, president of Schulz Wealth in Mansfield, Texas, explains it this way:
 
Finally, there are regular old investment accounts. You can open an account at your preferred financial institution and "contribute" as much as you want, or can. Any profit, whether from appreciation or dividends, will be taxed as long-term capital gains as long as the investments are held for more than one year. This likely means you'll pay a lower rate than you'd pay on ordinary income.
 
Daniel Schutte, of Credo Wealth Management in Denver, Colorado, explains this situation as follows:
 
If you're disciplined enough to ride out the inevitable lows and breathe deeply during the highs, a standard investment account might be the way to go. But they take a lot of effort to maintain and you may owe capital gains on income growth.
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). "Defined Contribution Retirement Plans: Who Has Them and What Do They Cost?" Page 8. Accessed May 11, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "401(k) Plan Overview." Accessed May 11, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Retirement Topics - 401(k) and Profit-Sharing Plan Contribution Limits." Accessed May 11, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Traditional and Roth IRAs." Accessed May 11, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "Choosing a Retirement Plan: SEP." Accessed May 11, 2020. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). "SEP Contribution Limits (Including Grandfathered SARSEPs)." Accessed May 11, 2020.