
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Refinancing your auto loan can help you lower your interest rate, reduce your monthly payment, and reduce the total amount of interest you pay on your car loan. Whether you're looking to free up cash flow or pay off your loan faster, an auto refinance can be a good option, especially in the current low-rate environment.
 
To create this list of the best auto refinance loans, we looked at auto loan products from 15 lenders and compared key factors, including APRs, minimum loan amounts, repayment terms, credit score requirements, and more.
  OpenRoad Lending 
OpenRoad Lending specializes in auto refinancing, offering traditional and cash-back refinancing options and a wide range of loan terms. Borrowers with excellent credit can refinance into some of the lowest rates available. In addition, it provides financing options for individuals across the credit spectrum.
 Low rates No application fees Specializes in auto refinancing Online application Minimum refinance amount of $7,500 Refinance restrictions on vehicle mileage, age, and brand 
Founded in 2009, OpenRoad Lending specializes in auto refinance loans and offers a range of car-related financial products. Rates for refinancing start as low as 1.99% for terms of up to 24 months. OpenRoad Lending says that on average its customers save 5.6% off of their existing APR.
 
Its traditional refinance product is open to borrowers of all credit ratings. There's also a cash-back refinancing option, which allows borrowers to get up to $5,000 cash back by refinancing their existing loan. 
 
In order to refinance with OpenRoad Lending, you must be financing a minimum of $7,500 and a maximum of $100,000 for a vehicle that is eight model years old or newer. The vehicle must also have less than 140,000 miles. Borrowers need a gross monthly income of at least $1,500 and can’t be self-employed. OpenRoad won’t refinance vehicles that are no longer being manufactured, commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, or motorcycles. 
 
You can apply for a loan through OpenRoad Lending via its online application or over the phone.
  RoadLoans 
Minimal credit requirements and flexible loan amounts make RoadLoans a worthwhile option for borrowers with less-than-perfect credit. It also offers a quick online application and approval process—it takes anywhere from 24 to 48 hours for your application to be approved or denied.
 No credit requirements Online application and approval Offers both traditional and cash-back refinancing Not available in certain states Doesn't disclose interest rates 
RoadLoans is a direct-to-consumer online lender based in Dallas and owned and operated by Santander Consumer USA. Its traditional and cash-back refinance loans have no credit requirements. The minimum loan amount is $5,000, while the maximum is $75,000, and loans are available in most states. 
 
Because of its lack of credit requirements, RoadLoans offers borrowers with poor credit the chance to refinance a car loan with little hassle. Indeed, those looking to refinance can get approved for a loan within 24 to 48 hours after submitting an application. 
 
RoadLoans doesn’t publish rates on its site, but rates are generally higher on loans that go to borrowers with bad credit. The tradeoff is that RoadLoans removes credit as a barrier to refinancing, making it a solid option for poor-credit borrowers who might not be able to get a loan elsewhere. 
  Bank of America 
Among big banks, Bank of America offers competitive refinance rates and an easy overall process. It's open to borrowers throughout the nation and it gets better-than-average scores in J.D. Power's 2020 U.S. Consumer Lending Satisfaction Survey.﻿﻿
 Competitive rates Online application Transparent rates and terms online Established financial institution Minimum finance amount of $7,500 Must have fewer than 125,000 miles Car can't be valued at less than $6,000 
Bank of America (BofA) offers a number of car loan refinance options. Borrowers can refinance any existing auto loan, whether the original loan is through BofA or another institution. Its rates for refinances start at 3.69%. Preferred Rewards customers of the bank can get up to a 0.5% discount on their rate.
 
The main disadvantage to getting an auto loan through Bank of America is its restrictions on which vehicles it will finance. It won't provide loans for vehicles over 10 years old, for vehicles with 125,000 miles or more, or for vehicles worth less than $6,000. It also won't provide a loan amount of less than $7,500 ($8,000 in Minnesota).
 
Those interested in refinancing through BofA can start the application process online. Bank of America says the application takes about 60 seconds. Once approved, payment is sent directly to the loan holder. Its online application allows for 48-, 60-, and 72-month terms, but it has more options if you apply in a branch or over the phone.
  PenFed Credit Union 
Members of PenFed get access to very competitive refinance rates. There's a convenient online application for refinances, and borrowers can finance up to 100% of their vehicle.
 Offers a wide range of options Competitive rates Loan amounts from $500 to $100,000 Online application Borrow up to 100% of the vehicle's value High minimum loan amount for longer terms Excellent credit history required for lowest rates Membership in the credit union is required 
For members of the credit union, PenFed provides a wide range of loan terms and very competitive rates. Refinance rates for 2019 and 2020 model years start as low as 2.14% for a 36-month loan for loan amounts ranging from $500 to $100,000. Rates start as 2.99% for vehicles with a model year of 2018 or earlier.
 
Rates and minimum loan amounts at PenFed increase as the refinancing term increases. For example, an 84-month refinance loan with a model year of 2019 or 2020 comes with a rate starting at 4.49%, up from 2.14% on a 36-month loan. As with most lenders, borrowers need excellent credit in order to get the lowest rates.
 
Keep in mind that membership in the credit union is required in order to refinance an auto loan. Membership is open to current and former military and their families. Those with no military affiliation can join by making a one-time donation to the National Military Family Association or a $15 donation to Voices for America's Troops. You also need to open a savings/share account with at least $5.
 LightStream 
LightStream offers competitive rates, a wide range of refinance options, and an entirely online process for refinancing. It also gets strong customer service ratings, receiving a top score in the J.D. Power 2020 Customer Lending Satisfaction Survey.﻿﻿
 Completely online process 0.5% discount with auto pay Same-day funding No restrictions on make, model, or mileage Online application only Requires a hard credit pull 
LightStream, the online lending arm of SunTrust Bank, offers a completely online lending process. Borrowers can receive a direct deposit as soon as the same day. For those with excellent credit, LightStream offers some of the most competitive refinance rates available with a wide range of loan terms. There are also no major restrictions on the type of vehicle you can refinance.
 
Rates from LightStream start as low as 2.49% on 24- to 36-month loans of $10,000 to $24,999. That’s with its autopay option. If you don’t opt for autopay, LighStream’s quoted rates increase by 0.50% points. You can finance loan amounts as low as $5,000 or as high as $100,000. Loans can’t be used to finance an existing LightStream loan. 
 
Keep in mind that LightStream requires a "hard pull" on your credit upfront. Hard credit pulls can slightly lower your credit score. Some lenders only require a soft pull on your credit.
 
If you aren't happy with your current car loan, you can refinance into a loan with a different interest rate and new terms.
 
Refinancing a car loan means taking out a new loan that replaces your existing loan. It's a brand-new loan that you often get from a different lender. Depending on the new lender's requirements, you might be able to keep the length of the loan the same, shorten it, or extend it.
 
When you refinance, your new loan amount will generally be the balance you have left on your current loan. However, some lenders allow for a cash-out refinance. Just keep in mind that taking out cash on a car with limited equity could cause you to owe more on the vehicle than it's worth.
 
Whether you should refinance your car loan depends on your situation.
 
Here's when it's beneficial to refinance your auto loan:
 
Here's when it's not beneficial to refinance your auto loan:
 
When to refinance depends on your circumstances and needs. Refinancing could make sense if your credit score has recently improved, if car loan rates have fallen, or if you need a lower monthly payment. 
 
Overall, consider refinancing when you can get a better deal on your car loan and it won't cause you to pay more for the vehicle.
 
Each lender has its own process and requirements for refinancing auto loans. However, the steps to refinance are generally similar to taking out an initial car loan. Here’s what the refinance process looks like:
 
The rules for refinancing an existing loan with the same lender vary by financial institution. PenFed Credit Union, for example, does not allow refinancing for cars already financed with the credit union. Other lenders do allow borrowers to refinance an existing loan.
 
Keep in mind that it may not always be beneficial to refinance with the same lender. You might find a better deal by refinancing with another institution.
