
If you are married and file a joint tax return, your federal tax rate may be lower than that of an unmarried individual. That's just one example of the ways in which U.S. tax laws are written to provide married couples with greater benefits than those received by other individuals. The same is true for retirement plans, which offer several perks for those who have tied the knot. These benefits are especially important for nonworking spouses who support a marriage in less financially-obvious ways, such as running a household and raising children.
 
A spousal IRA is simply a typical Roth or traditional IRA that is used by married couples. Note that these are not joint accounts. Each IRA is set up in the name of an individual spouse. For both 2019 and 2020, the use of a spousal IRA strategy allows couples who are married filing jointly to contribute $12,000 ($6,000 for each) to IRAs per year—or $14,000 ($7,000 for each) if they are age 50 or older, due to the catch-up contribution provision.﻿﻿
 
One of the eligibility requirements for making a contribution to an IRA is that you must have taxable compensation. But there's an exception for married individuals who have no taxable compensation and who file a joint tax return with a spouse who does have taxable earnings. The spouse who has taxable compensation is allowed to make a spousal IRA contribution to the IRA of a nonworking spouse, provided they have earned at least as much income as they contribute to their spouse's (and their own) IRA.﻿﻿
 
A retirement account owner can generally designate any party as the beneficiary of their retirement account. But in certain cases, if the account owner is married, their spouse must consent to the designation if the spouse is not the sole primary beneficiary of the retirement account. This ensures that your spouse does not designate someone else to receive death benefits from their retirement accounts without your approval.﻿﻿ 
 
If your spouse has assets in a qualified plan account, such as a 401(k), they are required to designate you as the sole primary beneficiary. Plan administrators generally won't accept beneficiary designations unless the spouse is the sole primary beneficiary or consents to an alternate designation, and the consent must be witnessed by a notary public or a plan representative.﻿﻿
 
Community property is generally defined as property acquired during a marriage. If an IRA owner lives in a community property state, spousal consent is generally required if the IRA owner designates any party other than their spouse as the primary beneficiary of the IRA. Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin are community property states.﻿﻿ Alaska has an opt-in law that allows residents to have their property treated this way.﻿﻿ Check with a tax attorney to find out if the following rules also apply in your state:
 
Quite often, retirement plan participants deplete their retirement assets without the knowledge of their spouses. This can be a devastating revelation to a spouse who was counting on those funds to finance the couple's retirement years. If the assets are in a defined-benefit, target-benefit, or money-purchase pension plan, depletion of those assets is unlikely to occur without the spouse's knowledge because they are generally required to be distributed in the form of a qualified joint and survivor annuity (QJSA), unless the participant and the spouse consent in writing to receive distributions in another form.﻿﻿
 
Exceptions apply to assets that are required to be distributed from the plan, including excess contributions, required minimum distributions, and amounts that can be cashed out without the participant's consent. In most cases, amounts can be cashed out without the participant's consent if their accrued balance under the plan is $5,000 or less.﻿﻿
 
While the QJSA rules always apply to all defined-benefit, target-benefit, and money-purchase pension plans, this is not the case for profit-sharing and 401(k) plans. Instead, the QJSA rules apply to these plans only if the plan is designed to include those options. Some profit-sharing and 401(k) plan documents, such as prototypes, are designed to allow employers to elect whether they want the plan to be subject to the QJSA rules.﻿﻿
 
If you inherit retirement plan assets, your options for distributing the assets are generally as follows:
 
If you are the deceased retirement account owner's spousal beneficiary, the options explained above are available to you, but you also have the following options:
 
Most of the benefits discussed in this article are meant to protect spouses, including those who do not have regular jobs but provide other forms of family support while the other spouse works at an income-producing job. If you are not working at a paid job and want to fund your IRA, consider using your spouse's income as your taxable compensation. In addition, if you are a qualified plan participant or an IRA owner, check with your plan administrator to determine whether you need to obtain the consent of your spouse for distributions and loans. Also, check with your IRA custodian to determine whether you need your spouse's consent if you decide to designate someone else as the primary beneficiary of your IRA.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - IRA Contribution Limits." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 590-A: Contributions to Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. U.S. Department of Labor. "FAQs about Retirement Plans and ERISA," Page 8. Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "25.18.1 Basic Principles of Community Property Law." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. The Alaska State Legislature. "Chapter 77. Community Property Act." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - Notices." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 590-B: Distributions from Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)." Accessed Aug. 28, 2020.