
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Anyone who owns a pet knows that there are more costs involved than you might initially think. Food can cost anywhere between $4 and $25 per week depending on the type of animal, not to mention treats, toys, beds, and other necessities. But the real cost of pet ownership comes from veterinary costs. While these costs average $190 per year for cats and $356 for dogs, they can easily multiply several times following a single unexpected illness or injury. The cost of a single surgical vet visit is estimated to be $574 for a dog and $337 for a cat.
 
To prepare for unexpected veterinary emergencies, many pet parents choose to enroll in a pet insurance plan. These policies typically incur a low monthly cost but can pay for up to tens of thousands of dollars in unanticipated vet bills—coverage that could equal a life-saving operation for your pet.
 
The pet insurance industry has boomed in recent years, and pet owners have never had more options to choose from. To help you select the best coverage for your pet, we’ve rounded up the best pet insurance plans using a quantitative scoring system that evaluates policy offerings, value, pricing, customer service, and more. Here are the best options from our research.
 Pet Assure 
While Pet Assure doesn’t fall under the standard pet insurance umbrella, its low cost and flexibility make it our top pick for owners of all types of pets.
 Low monthly fees Covers all types of household pets No annual limits or deductibles Not subject to waiting periods Pays for pre-existing conditions Limited to 5,600 in-network veterinarians Only covers 25% of costs Prescriptions not covered 
Today’s pet owners have the liberty of choosing from a wide range of coverage options for their furry friends’ health. These include both traditional insurance policies and alternatives like Pet Assure, which offers many of the same benefits while avoiding most drawbacks, earning it the position of best overall in our roundup of pet insurance plans.
 
Our Pet Assure review concluded that since the company isn’t constrained by the limitations of insurance regulations, they can provide more flexible plans that aren’t subject to annual coverage limits, deductibles, or waiting periods. Plan benefits cover nearly all treatments related to accidents, illnesses, and preventive care, which isn’t included in most standard insurance policies. Pets with pre-existing conditions that would typically be listed as exclusions will also find coverage with Pet Assure.
 
Instead of having to pay for veterinary costs out of pocket, Pet Assure members simply need to visit a participating veterinarian and present their membership information. This can be a drawback, as the Pet Assure network only consists of 5,600 providers; traditional pet insurers typically cover bills from any licensed vet. The plan also reimburses just 25% of veterinary costs compared to the 70% to 90% offered by standard policies, although Pet Assure’s low monthly cost of $12 is just a fraction of average insurance premiums.
 PetFirst Pet Insurance 
PetFirst’s wellness rider gives the best value for routine care with flexible benefits that can be tailored to your average annual expenditure.
 Wellness benefits available from $125 to $575 annually Deductibles start at just $50 Accident coverage begins the day after enrollment Online resource center Each preventive treatment has its own individual limit Accident and injury limits max out at $10,000 per year Trial period limited to 14 days Doesn’t offer an accident-only plan 
If your pet has never missed a booster shot and you want an insurance plan to help cover those expensive wellness costs, look no further than PetFirst. The company’s routine care rider can be added onto any accident and illness plan and reimburses treatments like checkups, vaccinations, flea and tick preventives, and more, making it the best for routine care among those we reviewed.
 
Five tiers of wellness plans are available with annual benefits starting at $125 for $7.69 per month and going up to $575 in benefits for $43.57 per month. Keep in mind that each preventive treatment has its own individual limit, and any unused benefits won’t carry over to the next year. To this end, PetFirst’s routine care plan is a great way to keep yourself accountable and make sure you’re staying on top of your pet’s wellness.
 
In our PetFirst review, we found that the company’s accident and illness policies are reasonably priced, with the average cost for a two-year-old dog around $24.21 per month. This is partly because annual limits are a bit lower than competitors at a maximum of $10,000 per year. There isn’t an option to purchase an accident-only policy. Trial periods are limited to 14 days, so you’ll have to decide whether you’re happy with the service before the two-week mark.
  Geico 
GEICO offers more pet insurance discounts than any other competitor, including lower rates for paying in advance, enrolling multiple pets, and spaying or neutering your dog or cat.
 Generous discounts available Low monthly premiums Flexible policy terms Offers wellness benefits Policies administered by a third party Wellness plans carry little value Limited online resources No option for unlimited benefits 
Our choice for best for discounts goes to GEICO thanks to a combination of low base pricing and unparalleled opportunities for additional savings. According to our GEICO pet insurance review, the insurer’s premiums are highly competitive without even taking discounts into consideration. On average, a two-year-old dog will cost just $24.02 per month for accident and illness coverage. But many pet owners may be eligible to pay even less thanks to the company’s generous discounts. Save as much as 10% when you spay or neuter your pet, pay for an entire year of coverage up front, or enroll multiple household pets together.
 
GEICO’s policy terms are also designed to give pet owners more control over their monthly payments with flexible terms that can be adjusted to control premiums. For example, those who are on a tight budget can try lowering their annual limit or raising their deductible to adjust monthly payments.
 
Wellness benefits are available for an additional $18.75 to $52.09 per month, but they don’t provide significant value. A year’s worth of premiums is only about $25 less than the total maximum benefits you can receive from the policy. Instead of functioning as a supplemental insurance policy, this rider mainly acts as a way to make regular contributions throughout the year toward the preventive care your pet needs to stay healthy.
 
Note that GEICO pet policies are serviced by Embrace, another company on this list that strictly offers pet insurance.
  USAA 
USAA is the go-to military provider for all types of insurance, and pet policies are no exception. Eligible pet parents can get up to 25% off their premiums by signing up through USAA.
 Discounts of 15% to 25% for servicemembers Visit any licensed vet in the world Multiple types of policies to choose from Pre-existing conditions covered after one year symptom-free Only available to military members Claims take up to three weeks to be processed Unlimited benefits not available Policies administered by a third party 
Military families have unique needs, particularly when facing relocation and deployment. USAA has served servicemembers and their loved ones since 1922 with various types of insurance, including pet policies, that keep these needs in mind. With USAA pet insurance, military pet owners can take their dog or cat to any licensed vet in the world no matter where duty takes them, which is why we chose it as the best pet insurer for servicemembers. 
 
There are several USAA pet plans to choose from, including accident-only coverage, accident and illness, and wellness benefits. Sticker prices for pet policies average around $24.02 for a two-year-old dog, although eligible members will qualify for a 15% to 25% discount based on their military status. A free medical history review is offered at signup during which an insurance professional will evaluate your pet’s medical history to look for pre-existing conditions. If anything comes up that could be excluded in the future, you’ll have 30 days to opt out of coverage and get a refund.
 
The benefits to having USAA pet insurance are nearly endless, although there are a few drawbacks. Claims take quite a bit longer to process than average: 15 business days, excluding time for payment processing. This is partially due to the fact that policies are administered by Embrace, a third-party pet insurer. USAA also doesn’t offer any pet policies with unlimited annual benefits, putting a cap at $30,000 per year. To learn more about the specific terms offered, see our complete USAA pet insurance review.
 Embrace Pet Insurance 
In case of an injury, Embrace has multiple plans that will cover your pet’s emergency bills at any licensed veterinary hospital. Accident benefits start after just two days, shorter than most competitors.
 Covers emergency care and hospitalization at any licensed clinic Short waiting period for accidents Accident-only plan available Complimentary medical history review offered Vanishing deductible program Doesn’t offer zero-deductible or unlimited benefit options Can only purchase accident-only coverage over the phone Additional fees for enrolling and paying monthly Mediocre wellness options 
One of the main reasons pet owners carry insurance is to cover emergency veterinary costs in case of an accident. Our review of Embrace found that the company offers the best solution for emergencies through its accident-only and accident and illness policies. Both plans can be used to cover your pet’s emergency expenses at any licensed vet clinic or hospital. No matter which policy you choose, accident benefits start only two days after enrollment.
 
When you sign up, Embrace will offer a free medical history review that examines your pet’s records for potential pre-existing conditions. This way there are no surprises, and you can back out of coverage if you discover certain treatments may be excluded.
 
For every year with Embrace that you don’t file an accident- or illness-related claim, the company will reduce your deductible by $50. While the company doesn’t offer a $0 deductible up front, a $200 option is available, which means your deductible could vanish entirely within four years as long as your pet doesn’t experience any health issues.
 
A wellness option is also available, although the value is considerably lower than the company’s accident and illness coverage. Annual premiums almost equal the total amount of benefits you stand to receive from Embrace’s preventive care rider.
  Hartville 
No matter how old your pet is, Hartville will let them sign up for a policy, and they’ll pay the same rate for accident coverage as younger animals. You won’t find a better deal for senior dogs.
 No maximum age limit Flat-rate injury and wellness coverage for all ages Discounts for paying up front One-month trial period Helpful online resources High premiums Scheduled preventive care benefits Long waiting period for injuries 
It’s far from uncommon for pet insurers to limit the age at which a pet can enroll in insurance, usually somewhere between eight and 12 years of age. If you’ve put off insuring your pet until later in life, Hartville will still welcome them with open arms, which makes it our top pick for older dogs. Not only is there no maximum age for initial enrollment, the company prices accident and preventive care benefits equally across all age groups.
 
The only thing that does increase as your pet ages is illness coverage, which does get significantly more expensive once pets reach the age of five. This is because older pets are simply more likely to develop serious illnesses with each year that passes.
 
However, there are ways you can reduce the cost of premiums. By paying annually instead of monthly, you’ll save $22 per year in fees. Of course, you can also opt for Hartville’s accident-only policy to make sure you’re protected against unforeseen circumstances and you'll pay just for illness care out of pocket.
 
But premiums still aren’t cheap. According to our Hartville pet insurance review, you should plan to pay $47.18 on average per month to cover a two-year-old dog with accident and illness benefits. Accident-only coverage starts at $16.31 monthly. Make sure you’re also aware that accident benefits don’t begin until 14 days after enrollment, a longer waiting period than usual in the industry.
  24 Pet Watch 
If your pet battles a chronic condition, 24PetWatch’s $20,000 maximum annual limit will be more than sufficient to cover treatment. Any pre-existing conditions will no longer be excluded from coverage after 24 months without symptoms.
 High annual limit Pre-existing conditions reconsidered after 24 months symptom-free Coverage includes trip cancellation and boarding Lifetime protection plan available for an additional one-time fee Expensive premiums Veterinary exam required Age limits for dogs and cats Plans difficult to understand 
When your pet is diagnosed with a chronic condition, the long-term financial ramifications can be crippling, even if you have a pet insurance policy. Not only do insurance policies exclude any conditions that showed symptoms prior to the coverage start date, they also impose annual limits on the services you can receive. We chose 24PetWatch as the best policy for chronic conditions because the insurer offers high limits and is willing to forgive certain pre-existing illnesses.
 
24PetWatch’s ultra-high annual limit of $20,000 is more than sufficient for the majority of cases, giving you enough room to pursue treatment for even the most serious conditions like cancer. The company will also forgive pre-existing conditions if your pet goes without symptoms for 24 months; for example, if your pet showed signs of chronic ear infections as a puppy or kitten but didn’t suffer another infection for two years, 24PetWatch would cover treatment in spite of your pet’s previous history with the same condition.
 
There are, however, a few pieces of red tape to go around. For one, a veterinary exam is required within the first month of enrollment to look for potential pre-existing conditions. There are also maximum age limits of 10 for dogs and 12 for cats when looking at initial enrollment. Finally, premiums are considerably above the norm with the average two-year-old dog paying $41.79 per month, although this will vary by age and species. Check our 24PetWatch pet insurance review for a complete pricing table.
 
Figo is the friendliest insurer for pet parents who prefer to seek alternative treatments for their pets, such as acupuncture, hydrotherapy, and herbal medicine.
 Base plan includes holistic and alternative care Visit any licensed veterinarian 24/7 virtual vet visits available Thirty-day money-back guarantee Flexible customer service Only offers one plan and one rider Exam fees not covered in base plan Recommends an enrollment exam Subject to both annual and lifetime limits 
Holistic treatment is rapidly gaining traction in the world of human medicine, but it’s taken a bit longer to catch up among veterinarians. For this reason, many pet insurers won’t cover any type of alternative or holistic care. Figo, our winner for best holistic care, is an exception. Holistic treatments are included in the provider’s base policy at no additional charge, so long as they’re administered by a licensed veterinary professional.
 
With Figo, you can have your pet’s acupuncture, hydrotherapy, herbal regimen, and more covered under the basic accident and illness policy. You’ll also have access to a 24/7 virtual veterinarian in case you have any questions about pursuing holistic care as an alternative or supplement to traditional medicine.
 
On that note, our review of Figo pet insurance found that the company’s customer service is easy to get in touch with across the board. Agents are available via phone, text, live chat, email, and Twitter. The Figo Pet Cloud app is a great way to connect with the community as a whole by sharing tips and connecting with other pet owners.
 
Keep in mind that Figo only offers a single accident and illness plan that covers most treatments but excludes exam fees. Exam fee coverage can be purchased through a rider for an additional few dollars per month. Typically, a two-year-old dog will pay approximately $24.74 per month for accident and illness coverage through Figo.
  ASPCA 
Not only does the ASPCA cover dogs, cats, and horses, the company also offers a 10% multi-pet discount, making it the best choice for homes with multiple furry family members.
 10% multiple pet discount Covers horses, dogs, and cats Offers a smartphone app Visit any licensed veterinarian in the U.S. or Canada Doesn’t offer unlimited benefits Not directly administered by the ASPCA Wellness benefits subject to per-treatment limits 
You may know the ASPCA as an animal rights nonprofit, but the group has also teamed up with insurance company Crum & Forster to offer pet insurance policies to owners of dogs, cats, and horses. For households with more than one of these critters, the ASPCA offers a 10% discount for each subsequent pet that signs up together, which is why we’ve named it the best for multiple pets.
 
There are several different plans available from the ASPCA. Cats and dogs are eligible for accident-only and accident and illness options, while horses have their own tailored plans that also cover colic. All three can elect optional wellness riders that cover various types of preventive care depending on the species.
 
Getting care for your entire household of pets is incredibly easy through the ASPCA. Simply visit any licensed veterinarian in the U.S. or Canada and save a copy of the bill. Once you’ve paid, it only takes a few minutes to snap a photo and upload it to the ASPCA’s free My Pet Insurance app.
 
There isn’t much not to like about ASPCA pet insurance, although the insurer stops short of offering unlimited plans; annual benefits for accidents and illnesses only go up to $10,000 for cats and dogs and $7,000 for horses. Wellness plans have scheduled benefits, meaning each individual treatment has its own annual limit. See our full ASPCA pet insurance review for more details.
 
Pet insurance is a type of insurance policy that helps protect you financially in the event of unexpected veterinary costs. Every month, you pay a premium to the insurance company in exchange for ongoing coverage. If your pet gets sick or is injured, you can submit the vet bill to the insurance company for partial or full reimbursement depending on your plan. You’ll typically need to pay an annual deductible before the insurance company starts covering costs. From that point on, all eligible veterinary costs will be covered up to your policy’s annual limit.
 
Pet insurance covers different types of treatments depending on the plan. Accident-only policies only pay for bills that result from an injury, for example, if your pet is hit by a car or ingests a foreign object. Accident and illness policies cover these injuries in addition to most illnesses, from common viruses to serious diseases like cancer.
 
Some insurers give pet parents the option to add on wellness coverage, which pays for some or all of your pet’s preventive care costs like vaccinations and annual checkups. Without a wellness rider, however, these treatments generally aren’t covered by a standard policy.
