
For those who like driving a nice set of wheels but can’t afford huge monthly payments, a car lease can be a tempting alternative to taking out a loan. But those benefits do come at a cost, one of which is flexibility. If you decide you want to return the vehicle before the lease expires, you’ll likely face some stiff early termination fees.
 
However, drivers who want out of their contract ahead of schedule can take heart – there are a few options that allow you to circumvent the usually harsh termination penalties. One frequently overlooked path – and often the least expensive choice – is to transfer the lease to someone else.
 
Suppose you have two years left on a three-year lease. Whoever buys your lease agrees to make the remaining monthly payments. While some finance companies don’t allow such transfers, the vast majority do. The trick is finding someone interested in taking the reins from you.
 
Fortunately, several websites make that job a lot easier. Sites like Swapalease and LeaseTrader provide listings that help match existing lessees with potential lease buyers.
 
These trades can be just as advantageous for those assuming the lease. For one thing, they won’t have to put up a sizable down payment for the vehicle, which the original leaseholder has already done for them. Furthermore, some people only need a car for a relatively short period of time – say, one or two years. Taking over someone else’s lease is an ideal way to obtain a relatively new car for such a short period. 
 
Keep in mind that getting someone else to assume your lease usually isn’t free. Using a trading website to facilitate the transaction will usually cost between $100-$350. However, that’s a fraction of what most leasing companies will charge should you decide to return your vehicle early. Some finance companies also assess a lease transfer fee – typically around $300 – when you arrange a swap.
 
To sweeten the pot, you may want to consider offering an up-front incentive, say $500, to lower the payments the person you transfer to will need to make.
 While buying the car with the intention of quickly selling it might seem preferable to an early lease termination fee, the reality is you might end up taking a loss on the sale, and that loss could be bigger than the early termination fee. 
Before deciding to register with a lease-trading website, it’s important to perform your due diligence with both the company that holds your lease and the website. Here’s what you’ll want to know:
 
Depending on your goals, there are other possible ways to unload your leased vehicle. These include: 
 
There are a number of ways to get out of your lease. Transferring the contract to an interested party can be a particularly appealing choice. Just make sure the financing company allows such transfers before you start. 
