
Thanks to its warm climate, desirable beaches and rolling mountains, Los Angeles is one of the most expensive places to live in the United States. Los Angeles is actually known as "88 cities within a city," where many smaller suburbs have grown together to create the greater Los Angeles area.
 
Thanks to these suburbs and cities, there are many unique places to live in Los Angeles, with a wide range of home prices. The following are the top eight most expensive neighborhoods in Los Angeles based on average home sale price as of the beginning of 2019:
 
An exclusive gated community that's home to stars like Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson, Malibu Colony Beach – also known as "the Colony" – is perhaps the most desirable neighborhood in Los Angeles, with a median sales price of $10.65 million. Right on the water, it boasts some outstanding views and everything is a quick walk or bike ride away. The area is safe and guarded, making it ideal for celebrities with children looking for some fun in the sun.
 
The Beverly Hills Gateway is one of the most famous Beverley Hills neighborhoods and is home to the famous Beverly Hilton, where the Golden Globes are held every year, the Virginia Robinson Gardens, and the iconic Beverly Hills hotel.
 
Trousdale Estates, located within Beverly Hills, right at the foot of the Santa Monica mountains, is the second-most exclusive neighborhood in Los Angeles. Some notable residents include Jennifer Aniston and Jane Fonda, while past icons like Elvis, Sinatra, and Groucho Marx all made their homes in Trousdale.
 
One of the most beautiful areas in Beverly Hills, the flats have the iconic tree-lined streets that scream Beverly Hills to anyone who has ever seen a movie. Just south of the Gateway and north of Santa Monica Blvd, this charming neighborhood has boasted residents like Phil Collins, Justin Bieber, Demi Moore, Betty White, and more.
 
This Malibu neighborhood is a gated community with just 100 lots, making it one of the most exclusive neighborhoods in the city. The Retreat is brought together by a religious center run by the Franciscan Friars, who welcome all looking for meditation and reflection.
 
Carbon Mesa, a Malibu neighborhood, comes in at #6. There are mansions aplenty on this road right by the water, boasting incredible ocean views and complete seclusion from city life.
 
Homes on La Mesa Drive in this Santa Monica neighborhood are among the most expensive in Los Angeles county. Views of Santa Monica Canyon and the Pacific Ocean make it particularly desirable.
 
This neighborhood built primarily around private beach access is in great demand. The architecture reflects a range of styles. This Malibu neighborhood comes in at #8.
