
Fort Myers, Florida is a mixture of old and new, and it appeals to retirees from around the world. The city has many attractions, including the Thomas Edison Museum and a redesigned downtown with shops and restaurants. There are numerous beaches and public and private golf courses. The city has a diverse population, many entertainment and cultural activities, a relatively low cost of living and many 55-plus communities, making it an ideal retirement destination. Five of the most highly rated retirement communities in Fort Myers are Heritage Palms, Gulf Harbour Yacht & Country Club, Legends Golf and Country Club, Seven Lakes, and Cross Creek Country Club.
 
Heritage Palms is a gated retirement community established in 1999. One of the largest in Fort Myers, the community has over 1,600 homes ranging from $100,000 to $900,000. Condos, veranda homes, and single-family homes are available to buyers and range from under 2,000 square feet to 4,200 square feet. Most of the homes have two bedrooms and two bathrooms, though alternate floor plans offer more. The veranda and single-family homes include a two-car to a four-car garage.
 
The focal point of the community is the nearly 30,000 square foot clubhouse that offers residents numerous amenities, including a fitness center, library and locker rooms. Outdoors, residents can utilize a heated pool and several tennis courts. The Lodge is a second clubhouse, accessible to residents with a membership plan. This 5,000 square foot clubhouse has several game rooms, a computer lab, and a restaurant. Also within Heritage Palms are two 18-hole golf courses and a driving range.
 The Thomas Edison museum, a vibrant, revamped downtown, and ample beaches are among the reasons Fort Myers, Florida appeals to retirees. 
The Gulf Harbour Yacht & Country Club is also a gated community, established in 1985. The community holds 1,616 homes in 22 different neighborhoods, ranging from $100,000 to $3 million. There are four styles available to buyers, and several floor plans ranging from 1,000 to 5,700 square feet. All of the homes have two to four bedrooms and bathrooms, and most have an attached garage. The single-family style homes can be customized to the buyer’s wishes, and some of the homes for resale currently have hot tubs and private pools.
 
Gulf Harbour’s 30,000 square foot clubhouse provides residents with resort-style amenities including two restaurants, a fitness center, and a spa. Residents have access to a junior Olympic-size pool, eight tennis courts, and a semi-private 18-hole golf course.
 Where Fort Myers, Florida ranked on the latest U.S. News & World Report listing of the "100 Best Places to Retire in the USA." 
Legends Golf and Country Club is also a gated retirement community comprised of nearly 1,300 homes ranging from $100,000 to $500,000. This community was established in 1999 and construction finished in 2006. Homebuyers may choose from villas, condos or single-family home styles. Floor plans include two to four bedrooms, up to three bathrooms, and some homes also have an attached garage. The smallest of the homes is 1,170 square feet while the largest is over 3,000 square feet. Residents pay a small homeowners association fee quarterly for the regular maintenance of neighborhood common areas, including the six pools located throughout the community.
 
Purchasing a home in this community gives residents an automatic membership to Legends’ 25,000 square foot clubhouse. Amenities offered within the clubhouse include a fitness center, restaurants, and a library. Residents can utilize a spa and resort-style pool, walking and biking trails, and numerous tennis courts. For an additional fee, residents can also obtain a membership to utilize the 18-hole golf course in the community.
 
Seven Lakes sits on 180 acres of land and holds just under 1,100 homes. It is one of the oldest and most affordable communities in Fort Myers, with homes ranging from just under $100,000 to just under $200,000. This community offers condominiums and attached villas that range from 700 square feet to 1,600 square feet, and have one to two bedrooms and bathrooms. A pro-rated monthly homeowners association fee enables residents to utilize all available amenities, including cable television, trash pickup, and lawn and building maintenance.
 
Residents of Seven Lakes have access to additional activities and features at the Pavilion clubhouse. Amenities available to homeowners include game rooms, a library, and an arts and crafts studio. Seven Lakes offers an 18-hole executive golf course, several tennis courts, a main pool outside the clubhouse and any of the six heated pools spread throughout the community.
 
Cross Creek Country Club is a golf-centered community established in 1985. The real estate in this community includes over 900 villas and single-family homes in 18 subdivisions, ranging from $100,000 to $400,000. Floor plans for these homes range from 860 square feet to nearly 1,800 square feet and include two bedrooms, one to 2.5 bathrooms, and a covered parking space or an attached garage.
 
At the center of Cross Creek Country Club is a large clubhouse that offers residents a restaurant, game rooms, and a library. Outside the clubhouse is a heated pool and spa area, and there are 10 additional pools located throughout the community. Residents can also play on one of several tennis courts or the specially designed golf course created by Arthur Hills.
