
It's now the season when retailers are opening their doors in anticipation of shoppers opening their wallets in search of the best Black Friday deals. Millions are set to get a jump start on the sales on Thanksgiving, and millions more are scouting out the stores for Black Friday. If you’ll be joining the crowds, it helps to know where the best bargains can be found.
 
Black Friday sales ads have been rolling out early this year, with retailers such as Wal-Mart and Target doing their best to compete with Amazon. Despite the size of your budget, here are some deals you might appreciate.
 
Walmart (WMT) is a Black Friday shopping staple, and the 2019 Black Friday ad features some hard-to-beat deals. Among the highlights are Hisense 58-inch 4K Smart TV that's on sale for $279.99. Walmart's Black Friday sale also features tons of deals on kids’ toys and clothes, as well as tires.
 
Target has Black Friday deals that are sure to hit their mark. Shoppers can score an Element 65" Roku Smart 4K UHD HDR TV for $279.99, a special purchase price for Black Friday, and Beats Solo3 Wireless headphones for $129.99 for a savings of $179.00. Target's Black Friday sale covers electronics, toys, games, and more. Don't want to fight the crowd? REDcard holders gain early access to select Black Friday sales online on Wednesday, November 27.
 
Amazon (AMZN) sponsors a week (starting on November 22) of Black Friday deals, with new sales offered daily. However, there are a few promotions shoppers may want to prioritize. At the top of the list is the 3rd generation Echo Show 8 for $99.99, and the Echo Show 5 for $80. During its Black Friday week of sales, Amazon is releasing deals on Fire tablets, Paperwhite tablets, and other electronics.
 Some stores offer "Black Friday" savings before Thanksgiving week, depending on the retailer and deals offered to its shoppers. 
Best Buy (BBY) has struggled to remain competitive with Amazon, but it’s coming out swinging on Black Friday, and this year, doors open on Thanksgiving, November 27, 2019, at 5 pm.
 
Best Buy is offering special "doorbuster" prices on electronics like iPads (save $80 to $100 on select models), MacBook Air laptops (prices start at $889.00), and televisions. For example, the Samsung 70" Class (LED 6 Series) Smart 4K UHD with HDR is marked down to $549.99 from $899.99.
 
Shoppers who are looking for deals on apparel, housewares, and toys may want to check out Macy’s (M) on Black Friday. Macy's 40-page circular for 2019 features door-buster deals that include steep discounts on appliances, cookware, bedding, and linens. Up to 70% off fine jewelry like diamond earrings and pendants.
 
As part of its Black Friday promotion, Kohl’s (KSS) is offering $15 in Kohl’s Cash (coupons used for in-store purchases) for every $50 spent between November 25-29, 2019. For the kids: a Nintendo Switch console, carrying case, and controller charging dock is a Black Friday favorite. Pick it up for $319.99 (plus $90 worth of Kohls cash). If getting in shape is one of your New Year’s resolutions, check out the deals on Fitbit Charge 3 wristbands for $99.99, plus $30 Kohl's Cash. The store is offering special prices on everything from vacuum cleaners to jewelry to toys over the Thanksgiving weekend.
 
Home Depot (HD) is the ultimate shopping destination for deals on refrigerators, stoves, washers, and dryers this Black Friday. Shoppers can save 40% on selected brands, and you can get additional savings of $60 to $600 when you buy two or more major appliances. Power tools, holiday lighting, and other decor are included in Home Depot's Black Friday specials.
 
The best way to get ready for Black Friday is to begin planning early and check out deals in advance. Compare your shopping list with your budget, so you don’t accidentally overspend. And remember that the sales and savings don’t end on Black Friday. You’ll also want to check out what retailers have to offer on Small Business Saturday and Cyber Monday.
