
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
As a nonstandard car insurance company, the General allows people with imperfect driving records to get insurance policies that meet state-level minimum requirements quickly. Even if you have serious infractions on your driving record, such as a driving under the influence (DUI) conviction or an at-fault accident, you can still qualify for coverage through the General.
 
However, its coverage options are limited, and its policies may be more expensive than you can find elsewhere.
 Offers insurance to drivers with histories of driving violations or accidents Get an online quote without giving your personal information SR-22 filings available Not available in all states Limited customer service availability Expensive premiums for people with good driving records The General is a licensed insurance agency that is a subsidiary of PGC Holdings Corp. Depending on where you live, your policy may be underwritten by Permanent General Assurance Corporation, Permanent General Assurance Corporation of Ohio, or the General Automobile Insurance Company, Inc. 
When you get a quote online, the quote you get first is the price for a policy that meets state-level minimum requirements. If you want additional coverage, you’ll have to edit the coverages to get an updated quote. The General’s car insurance policies have the following coverage options:
 
Depending on your state, you may only be required to have property damage liability coverage. However, many people add bodily injury liability protection to their policies.
 
The General only offers uninsured motorist bodily injury protection, which is optional in most states. If you are in an accident, and the at-fault driver is uninsured or has insufficient insurance, this coverage option will pay for expenses you incur, such as lost wages or medical bills.
 
While collision and comprehensive insurance aren’t required in most states, the General does allow you to add these coverages to your policy.
 
You can add these options to your policy:
 
Several factors impact your premiums with the General, including your age, gender, driving record, vehicle type, and how long you’ve been driving. While the General does offer insurance to people with driving infractions on their records, having a history of accidents or DUIs will cause you to pay a higher premium than if you had a clean driving record.
 
We got insurance quotes for two different drivers, both 35-year-old women living in Florida. One had an excellent driving record, while one had an at-fault accident on her record and needed an SR-22 certification. We requested quotes for state minimum coverages for a mid-sized sedan. In Florida, that means $10,000 in property damage liability coverage. Because SR-22 certification has additional requirements, we also added $10,000/$20,000 in bodily injury liability.
 
The General has a few discounts that can reduce your premiums.
 
The General provides coverage to most U.S. states. However, it is not in New Mexico and Michigan, nor does it operate in the territory of Puerto Rico. Coverage options and discounts can vary by location.
 
While many other insurance companies require you to work with an agent to get a car insurance policy, the General allows you to get a quote and purchase coverage online. And if you need proof of car insurance right away, you can print off your insurance card after purchasing your policy. You can contact the General’s customer service over the phone, through secure email, or via online chat.
 
The General is not included in the J.D. Power Auto Claims Satisfaction Study. However, AM Best, the credit rating agency that focuses on the insurance industry, gave the General’s parent company an A (Excellent) Financial Strength Rating. AM Best’s Financial Strength Ratings are the agency’s opinion on how financially stable a company is and whether it can be counted on to pay out its benefits if you file a claim.﻿﻿
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) maintains a database of complaints received about insurance companies. Each year, it releases a complaint ratio for insurance companies, which is the number of complaints the NAIC received relative to a company’s market share.
 
The NAIC considers scores of 1.0 to be average. Anything above 1.0 means the company received more complaints than average, while scores below 1.0 mean the company received fewer complaints than average. For 2019 the General’s complaint ratio was 1.21, meaning it received more complaints than is expected for a company of its size.﻿﻿
 For the past three years the General has had a much worse-than-average complaint ratio, signaling that it has consistently received more complaints than is typical for its market share. 
The General mainly offers auto insurance, but it also sells term life insurance policies. American Family Life Insurance from the General is underwritten by American Family and administered by Homesite.
 
You can make a claim via the mobile app, online, or by calling 800-280-1466 and selecting option three. When you report a claim, you’ll be asked where the incident occurred, when it happened, and if you filed a police report. If you have the contact information for the other driver or property owner, you should include that information too.
 
After you file a claim, the General will assign you a claims adjuster, who will act as your contact. The adjuster will reach out to you with the next steps.
 
You can cancel your policy by contacting the General’s customer service team. However, keep in mind that there may be a cancellation fee. Depending on your state, you may have to pay a fee of 10% of the unearned premium for canceling the policy prior to the end of the policy term. And if you need insurance later on, the General charges a reinstatement fee if your policy was canceled.
 
You can get an insurance quote online. You'll be asked for the following information and your car and yourself:
 
The General will use this information to give you a quote that meets state-level minimum requirements. You can adjust the coverage to meet your needs. Once you’re happy with your quote, you can proceed with the application. The General will review your driving record to finalize your quote.
 
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company, meaning it specializes in serving customers who have less-than-perfect driving records and credit histories. If you have a history of past driving infractions, the General can be a useful resource for insurance. However, if you have good credit and a clean driving record, you can likely find cheaper coverage and more options with another insurer.
 If you have struggled to find a car insurance company that is willing to insure you because of your driving record or credit, the General can be a solution to your problem. It specializes in policies for people with past driving infractions, and you can get insurance online and comply with state-level minimum requirements quickly. However, those with clean driving records will find the General expensive and offers limited coverage options.