
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
﻿Your credit score can be the key metric when it comes to buying a car or a home. If you have a lower credit score, these purchases can be more expensive and difficult to achieve—and you may have to pay higher interest rates. According to myFICO, your mortgage interest rate may vary by 1.5% depending on your credit score.﻿﻿ For example, with a 30-year, $250,000 mortgage, you could pay an extra $80,000 in interest, or worse—you may get denied for a loan altogether.
 
You may have negative marks on your credit reports from late payments, maxing out credit cards, or debt in collections, all of which may hurt your creditworthiness. If you don’t have the time or desire to fix these credit report blemishes, you can pay someone else to do the work for you.
 
One option is working with a credit repair company. These companies act on your behalf by negotiating with your creditors and working with the three credit agencies—Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax. While the industry has its share of scams, these six credit repair companies are worth considering based on effectiveness, cost, customer service, and more.
 Ovation Credit Services Free consultation No-risk refund policy Discounts for couples, seniors, and military High monthly fees First work fee (an enrollment fee) Credit monitoring for Essentials Plus plan only 
Ovation Credit Services, a LendingTree company, has been in business since 2004. Founded by attorneys, the Jacksonville, Florida-based company offers proven credit repair services and has helped fix more than 120,000 credit profiles, with an average of 19 improvements per customer, according to the company’s website.
 
Ovation Credit Services offers two credit repair service options:
 
Essentials Plus: $89 first work fee, $109 per month
 
Essentials Plan: $89 first work fee, $79 per month
 
Both plans include a free consultation and a no-risk refund policy. You will also have one-on-one service through a Personal Case Advisor. The company offers services in all states except Minnesota and South Carolina, according to a company representative. 
 
Ovation Credit Services is Better Business Bureau accredited with an A+ rating with 70 reviews and 38 complaints.﻿﻿ The company has had no complaints with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.﻿﻿
 
Why We Chose It: Ovation Credit Services stands out in a number of ways. The company earns our top spot with a long history of credit repair, a winning Better Business Bureau rating, and top-notch customer service. Ovation Credit Services also builds customer trust with their free consultation and no-risk refund policy.   
 Sky Blue Credit 90-day money-back guarantee Fixed, transparent pricing Discounts for couples Setup fee Not accredited with Better Business Bureau 
Sky Blue Credit has been in the credit repair business since 1989. The Boca Raton, Florida-based company disputes 15 items—or five items per credit bureau—every 35 days, according to the company’s website. 
 
Sky Blue Credit offers one simple credit repair service option:
 
Sky Blue Credit: $79 setup fee, $79 per month
 
Sky Blue Credit offers a 90-day, money-back guarantee, and the average customer works with the company for six months. You may pause the service or change the billing date any time—without paying an extra fee. These services are available in all states except for Colorado and South Carolina, according to a representative. 
 
Sky Blue Credit isn’t currently Better Business Bureau accredited.﻿﻿ There have been two Sky Blue Credit complaints with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.﻿﻿
 
Why We Chose It: Sky Blue Credit stands out thanks to the company’s simple, easy-to-understand service offering. They offer transparency on exactly what they do—and how long customers spend with them. We especially love the 90-day money-back guarantee and ability to pause the service any time without paying a fee.
 Credit Saint 90-day, money-back guarantee Three credit repair packages Transparent pricing Not available in all states First work fee 
Credit Saint, a Saddle Brook, New Jersey-based company, has been in business since 2007. The company’s website features rankings from various personal finance websites, and their services include a personal advisory team, an online account, and ongoing credit education. 
 
Credit Saint's three simple levels of credit repair service provide customers with a clear-cut path to becoming more creditworthy:
 
Credit Polish: $99 first work fee, $79.99 per month
 
Credit Remodel: $99 first work fee, $99.99 per month
 
Clean Slate: $195 first work fee, $119.99 per month
 
Credit Saint offers a free consultation by phone, and then you'll have online access and phone support throughout the process. You'll also rest easy with the company’s 90-day money-back guarantee. There is one thing to be aware of, though: Credit Saint doesn’t offer services in 12 states, according to a representative.
 
Credit Saint is Better Business Bureau accredited with an A rating.﻿﻿ Over the past year, there haven’t been any customer complaints with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
 
Why We Chose It: Credit Saint offers the most comprehensive package for simple credit repair needs for those who may not require all the bells and whistles of the more expensive plans. The company also has a long history, a strong reputation, and an excellent money-back guarantee. 
 The Credit Pros 90-day money-back guarantee Certified FICO professionals No setup fee Not available in four states 
The Credit Pros is an AI-driven personal credit improvement company staffed with Certified FICO professionals. The Newark, New Jersey-based company has been around since 2009. 
 
The Credit Pros offers four credit repair packages, which include: 
 
CreditSentry Monitoring: $19 per month
 
Money Management: $69 per month
 
Prosperity Package: $119 per month
 
Success Package: $149 per month
 
There are no additional setup fees, according to a representative. All four credit repair packages include: 
 
The Credit Pros offers a free consultation by phone. According to a representative, the company has a 90-day money-back guarantee if they can’t remove any negative items from your credit reports. The representative also confirmed that the company provides services in all states except Kan., Maine, Minn., and Ore.
 
The Credit Pros is Better Business Bureau accredited with an A rating. There haven’t been any complaints with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau over the past year.
 
Why We Chose It: The Credit Pros offers the most comprehensive package options, including other services to improve your finances. You may have access to identify monitoring, bill reminders, budgeting software, medication discounts, and more.
 The Credit People Satisfaction guarantee Transparent pricing FCRA Certified Credit Consultants Not accredited with the Better Business Bureau Setup fee for monthly plan 
The Credit People has spent 20 years helping Americans repair their credit, employing a team of FCRA Certified Credit Consultants. The Cottonwood Heights, Utah-based company has processed more than 310,000 credit reports, according to the company’s website.
 
The Credit People offers two credit repair options:
 
Both options include the following:
 
Both plans include the company’s risk-free guarantee. You can cancel at any time without being charged for the month. Flat-rate members have a six-month satisfaction guarantee. The Credit People offers service in every state except for Oregon, according to a representative.
 
The Credit People is not accredited by the Better Business Bureau; it has seven complaints and three reviews with the BBB.﻿﻿ It’s not easy to find The Credit People in the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s consumer complaint database.﻿﻿ 
 
Why We Chose It: The Credit People’s risk-free six-month guarantee stands out among all the companies we reviewed.
 AMB Credit Consultants Six-month money-back guarantee Customer education High enrollment fees Six- to nine-month commitment 
AMB Credit Consultants has been helping Americans improve their credit for more than 10 years. The Dallas, Texas-based company focuses not only on improving credit reports but also on empowering customers through client advocacy and advisement. AMB Credit Consultants can help enable their clients to recognize and correct the negative financial habits that lead to poor credit in the first place.
 
AMB Credit Consultants offers two credit repair service options:
 
These options include the following:
 
You are obligated to commit to at least six to nine months of service. You also must sign up for credit monitoring through IdentityIQ before scheduling your first consultation. There is a $25 cancellation fee if you don’t cancel an appointment at least 24 hours ahead of time.
 
The company offers a money-back guarantee. If AMB Credit Consultants doesn’t remove at least one negative mark from your credit reports within six months, the company will offer a refund.﻿﻿ We were unable to reach AMB Credit Consultants’ team by phone during business hours to confirm where the company does business.
 
AMB Credit Consultants has earned an A+ rating with the Better Business Bureau but isn’t accredited. There haven’t been any complaints with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.﻿﻿
 
Why We Chose It: AMB Credit Consultants focuses on empowering customers through better financial education through its financial literacy courses. According to the company’s website, they hope to “influence good credit decisions that last a lifetime.” 
 
When it comes to credit repair, there are many service providers to choose from, each offering to boost your credit score. But per the Credit Repair Organizations Act (CROA), companies can’t promise results. If you can’t afford to pay for a credit repair company's services, it may be possible to achieve the same results on your own for free.
 
Credit repair companies may improve your credit score for a fee. These companies review your credit reports and work to remove negative information.﻿﻿ This may involve negotiating with your creditors. It also may include disputing inaccuracies with the credit bureaus.﻿﻿ As the negative marks disappear, your credit score will improve.
 
Credit repair companies can improve your credit score, especially if your damaged credit history feels like too much to tackle alone. But credit repair companies aren’t the only option. You may seek guidance from a non-profit credit counselor through the National Foundation for Credit Counseling.﻿﻿
 
Unfortunately, fraud is common in the credit repair industry.﻿﻿ Before signing up with a credit repair company, you should always do your homework. 
 
Start by making a list of established companies. Check ratings with the Better Business Bureau and search for complaints in the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau database. After narrowing down your list, you can interview each company before making a decision. 
 
According to the Federal Trade Commission, there are several signs of fraud to watch for:
 
The Credit Repair Organizations Act (CROA) says you have the right to cancel a contract within three days of signing for any reason.﻿﻿ If you have trouble with a credit repair company, you can report the issue to your state attorney general or the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
 
According to our research, most companies charge an upfront fee, ranging from $19 to $149. After that, you can expect to pay $19 to $149 per month. It may take up to six months or longer to improve your credit score, depending on your situation. It’s also possible to repair your credit on your own for free.  
 
It can be challenging to find the right credit repair company. To create our list, we looked for established companies offering nationwide services. We also considered each company's reputation and searched for regulatory enforcement action. We compared each company's services, pricing, and transparency.
 myFICO. "Loan Savings Calculator." Accessed April 30, 2020. Better Business Bureau. "Ovation Credit Services by LendingTree." Accessed on October 12, 2020.  Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Consumer Complaint Database: Ovation Credit Services." Accessed October 12, 2020. https://www.bbb.org/us/fl/boca-raton/profile/credit-repair-advanced-fee/sky-blue-credit-0633-92005260 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Consumer Complaint Database: Sky Blue Financial Services, Inc." Accessed October 12, 2020. Better Business Bureau. "Credit Saint, LLC." Accessed October 12, 2020. Better Business Bureau. "The Credit People, Inc." Accessed October 12, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. "Consumer Complaint Database." Accessed April 29, 2020.