
While a residential mortgage loan is the most common type of financing used to purchase a home, owner financing is an alternative that has pros and cons for both buyers and sellers.
 
A home is typically the largest single investment a person ever makes. Because of the high cost, it usually involves some type of financing. Owner financing happens when a home buyer finances the purchase directly through the seller—instead of through a conventional mortgage lender or bank.﻿﻿
 
With owner financing, also called seller financing, the seller doesn’t hand over any money to the buyer as a mortgage lender would. Instead, the seller extends enough credit to the buyer to cover the purchase price of the home, less any down payment, and then the buyer makes regular payments until the amount is paid in full. The buyer signs a promissory note to the seller, which spells out the terms of the loan, including the interest rate, repayment schedule, and the consequences of default. The owner sometimes keeps the title to the house until the buyer pays off the loan.﻿﻿
 
Most owner-financing deals are short term and a typical arrangement might involve amortizing the loan over 30 years but with a final balloon payment due after five. The theory is that after five years the buyer should have enough equity in the home and/or have had enough time to improve his financial situation to qualify for a conventional mortgage loan.﻿﻿
 
Owner financing can be a good option for both buyers and sellers but there are risks. Here’s a look at the pros and cons of owner financing, whether you’re a buyer or a seller.
 A qualified real estate attorney should be consulted to answer any questions as well as write the sales contract and promissory note. 
Owner financing can be a good option for both parties in a real estate transaction:
 
Although owner financing can be beneficial to both buyers and sellers, it also has some legal, financial, and logistical disadvantages:
 While even the most sophisticated sellers are unlikely to subject borrowers to the stringent loan approval procedures that traditional lenders use, this doesn’t mean they won’t run a credit check. A potential buyer could be turned down if they are a credit risk. 
While it's not common, seller financing can be a good option for both parties under the right circumstances. But there are risks for both buyers and sellers that need to be considered. To allow the process to run smoothly, it's always prudent to enlist a qualified real estate attorney.
 Zillow. “What Is Seller Financing?” Accessed May 14, 2020. Trulia. “The Pros and Cons of Seller Financing.” Accessed May 14, 2020. United States Congress. "H.R.4173 - Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act." Accessed May 14, 2020.