
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
TIAA Bank was founded more than a century ago with the intention of helping teachers retire. Today it’s a full-service bank that has more than 80,000 in-network ATMs in the U.S.﻿﻿ While it’s primarily an online-only bank, you’ll be able to set foot in a physical branch if you’re in Florida.
 Debit card with perks Earn interest on checking account Extensive ATM network A limited number of physical branches Higher interest rates from online-only banks found elsewhere 
TIAA Bank should appeal to most customers who desire a full range of services with an online-only bank. It might be a particularly good fit for those who:
 
TIAA Bank offers a number of different types of accounts and services:
 
Basic Savings
 
TIAA Bank’s Basic Savings account requires only $25 to open one. If you keep at least $25 in your account, the monthly account fee gets dropped. If you don’t, you’re looking at a $5 fee each month. If you reside in Rhode Island, the minimum deposit and monthly account fee are waived.﻿﻿
 
Basic Checking 
 
TIAA Bank’s Basic Checking account has a $25 minimum deposit to get started. To waive the $5 monthly account fee, you’ll need to maintain a balance of $25. New York residents do not pay the monthly account fee nor are they required to have the minimum amount to open.﻿﻿
 
Yield Pledge Checking
 
There’s a $100 minimum to open an account. TIAA Bank’s checking enables you to earn interest. For the first year after opening the account, the intro rate is a competitive one at 0.40%. Then it kicks over to a tiered, ongoing APR that’s based on the account balance.﻿﻿
 
TIAA Bank promises that its APY rates remain competitive and are among the top 5% of interest rates. There’s no monthly maintenance account fee, and for balances less than $5,000, you get up to $15 reimbursed per month for out-of-network ATM fees. You also enjoy special perks with your debit card: purchase protection, return protection, and extended warranty protection.
 
Yield Pledge Money Market Account
 
TIAA Bank’s money market account has no monthly account fee and requires a $500 minimum deposit to get started. Like its Yield Pledge checking account, there’s a one-year intro APY. At 0.55% APY, it might be worth considering, especially if you want some liquidity with your cash. Then it kicks to tiered rates according to your account balance, starting at 0.50% APY for balances under $10,000.﻿﻿
 $1,000 is the minimum deposit requirement for opening a CD at TIAA Bank 
Basic CDs
 
TIAA Bank’s CDs range in terms of three months to five years. You need a minimum of $1,000 to sign up for a CD.﻿﻿ The rates are as follows:
 
If you withdraw early, you’ll be dinged with a penalty.
 228 days of simple interest on the amount of principal withdrawn 
CDARS Service 
 
For those who have a lot of money to park in a CD, TIAA Bank offers a way for you to deposit funds at other banks in its network. That’s so you can have access to millions of dollars in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insurance, versus the standard $250,000 per account. You’ll need at least $10,000 to open a CD through this service, and there are funding limits.﻿﻿
 
Bump-Rate CD 
 
Only for CDs with a term of three-and-a-half years, should the interest rate increase during the duration of your CD, you can “bump up” the existing rate of the CD to the new one. Note that you can only do this once and for one account.﻿﻿ 
 
TIAA Bank currently offers one credit card, which is its Rewards Credit Card.﻿﻿
 
TIAA Bank also offers a handful of other services and products: 
 
Whether you do banking, take out a mortgage or sign up for a credit card, TIAA offers live customer support. Depending on the products, the hours vary and are as follows: 
 
As you might expect from an online-only bank, TIAA Bank offers a variety of tools you can access on your phone or desktop. You can pay bills, receive payment alerts, and set up automatic bill pay. What’s more, you can create a budget and savings goals and send money to friends and family through Zelle. 
 
For help with banking-related issues, TIAA’s customer support team is available seven days a week, from 8 a.m. to 11 p.m. EST. Prefer to tweet for support? You can, at TIAA’s customer support account, https://twitter.com/TIAABankHelp, from Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. EST. If your debit or credit card gets lost or stolen, around-the-clock service is available.
 
As with other online-only financial institutions, you can sign up for a TIAA account online. Have questions before you sign up? You can reach out to their customer support, or poke around its help center.
 TIAA Bank might be a good option for those who want an online bank that makes it easy for them to get money from an ATM and make a lot of purchases on their debit card. If you are looking at opening an account with an online-only bank, you’ll probably be able to find higher interest rates elsewhere. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 TIAABank.com. "ATM Locator." Accessed March 20, 2020.