
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The TJX Rewards Platinum Mastercard is designed for people who frequently shop at TJX stores, including TJ Maxx, Marshalls, and HomeGoods.
 Enjoy 10% off your first online or in-store purchase. The TJX Rewards Mastercard is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Significant rewards for TJX purchases 10% off your first TJX purchase Widely accepted Limited redemption options Carrying a balance could be costly Not ideal for everyday spending 
The TJX Rewards Platinum Mastercard is best suited to people who regularly shop at TJX stores and want to earn rewards they can spend there. It's also appropriate for someone who frequently shops at TJX stores and wants to earn rewards on purchases made elsewhere. 
 
To put it in perspective, you'd have to spend $200 at TJX stores to earn 1,000 reward points, based on the 5% back rate. If that matches up with your typical spending habits, then this card could be a good fit. 
 
Note that there is also a non-Mastercard version of this card, the TJX Rewards credit card, which can be used only at TJX stores. It earns the same 5% back at TJX stores, and you still get the 10% discount on your first purchase.  
 
With either card, redemption works the same. And neither card charges an annual fee and the Mastercard version charges no foreign transaction fee. 
 
The TJX Rewards Platinum Mastercard has a simple rewards structure. When you use this card, you earn:
 
There is no introductory rewards bonus, although you do get 10% off your first purchase. Rewards are unlimited, so you can earn as many points as your spending allows. That includes rewards on TJX purchases as well as those made elsewhere. 
 
Redeeming rewards with the TJX Rewards Platinum Mastercard is as easy as earning them. 
 
When you accumulate 1,000 points you can redeem them for a $10 shopping certificate good for in-store or online purchases at TJX stores. You also have the option of redeeming for a $20 certificate if you have at least 2,000 reward points. Each point equates to a value of $.001 or a tenth of a cent.
 
Points earned with the card never expire. But once you redeem them for a rewards certificate, they're only good for two years from the date the certificate was issued. 
 
Maximizing your rewards with the TJX Platinum Rewards Mastercard means shopping at TJX stores whenever possible. Here are a couple of examples of how that might look, based on your spending habits. 
 
In this case, let's assume you’re a moderately frequent TJ Maxx, Marshalls, and HomeGoods shopper who spends $3,600 a year at those stores, or an average of $300 a month. You also spend another $500 a month on miscellaneous purchases with your card. 
 
At that spending rate, you'd earn 18,000 points on your TJX purchases and 6,000 points on miscellaneous spending. That works out to 24 $10 reward certificates, or $240 in savings on future purchases. 
 
Now, let's assume you’re an avid TJ Maxx, Marshalls, and HomeGoods shopper who spends $1,000 a month at those stores plus another $1,000 a month elsewhere. At that rate, you'd earn 60,000 points on your TJX purchases and 12,000 points on all other purchases. 
 
Altogether, you'd have 72,000 points. That would be good for 72 $10 reward certificates, or $720 in savings on future purchases. 
 
Synchrony Bank, which issues both the TJX Rewards Platinum Mastercard and the TJX Rewards card, received a score of 780 out of 1,000 in J.D. Power's 2019 U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study. The average rating for national issuers was 806. 
