
There are dozens of excuses for not saving for retirement, and they all sound good. You may have a few of your own. But you know you should. Here are four good reasons to save for retirement:
 
Sound good? Consider those four factors in greater detail.
 
Social Security wasn't designed to be anyone's sole income in retirement. According to the Social Security Administration, its payments replace about 40% of the average wage earner’s income after retiring. And, it adds, most financial advisors say retirees will need about 70% of their work income to live comfortably in retirement.﻿﻿
 
So there's a rule of thumb: Even with Social Security, you need to come up with about 60% of the income you'll need to live comfortably after you retire.
 
If you have children, you probably wouldn’t mind spending as much time with them as you possibly can. However, you probably also want that to be at your discretion. Having to live with the kids because you can't afford to live independently isn’t how most people want to spend their retirement years.
 The estimated percentage of retirement costs that Social Security covers.﻿﻿ 
Unless you win the lottery or get a big inheritance, you need to save enough to cover your expenses during your retirement years.
 
The number of investment opportunities out there is infinite, but when it comes to retirement, your initial focus should be on the ones that were created with retirement savings in mind, and that is the tax-deferred retirement account. While saving is generally a good thing, the compound effect of saving in a tax-deferred account cannot be overstated. Why?
 
If you work for a company, you may have access to a company-sponsored retirement account such as a 401(k) plan. It could be your best possible deal for retirement savings if the company matches a portion of your contribution. The average company match in 2019 was 4.7% while some companies offer more and others nothing at all.﻿﻿
 
If you are self-employed, run your own business, or your employer doesn't offer a plan, you still can contribute to a tax-deferred retirement account. You can open a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA at any financial services company or bank.
 
In either case, there are annual limits on the amount you can contribute:
 
Whether it's an IRA or a 401(k), you can either enjoy the immediate tax break of a traditional IRA or 401(k) or the post-retirement tax break of the Roth IRA or Roth 401(k) plan. (Many, but not all, companies offer a Roth option in their 401(k) plans.)
 
Here is an example:
 
If he invested nothing, Adam would make $962 a week and take home about $750. If he invests $100 a week in a tax-deferred account, he will take home about $672 a week. He takes home $78 less, but he has $100 more in his account. (This assumes his company contributes nothing to the account. Many but not all companies match a portion of the employee's savings.)
 
As his salary grows, his contribution will grow. As his contribution grows, his balance will grow and will benefit from the compounding effect of tax-deferred saving.
 
Say you contribute $15,000 to your 401(k) account each year, which earns a rate of return of 8%. Assume your tax rate is 24% and you invest these contributions for a 20-year period. The estimated net results, compared with the effect of adding these amounts to your regular savings accounts instead of a 401(k), would be as follows:
 
Assume you invest $50,000, and it accrues earnings at a rate of 8%. This produces earnings of $4,000. If your tax rate is 22%, that amounts to $880 that is paid to the tax authorities, leaving $53,120 to reinvest. Not only would you pay less in taxes, but the value of your investments would be even greater as a result of the compound effect of tax-deferred growth:
 
These numbers are compelling and get even more so if the earnings period is longer and the amount saved greater.
 
All of the above is about the benefits of tax-deferred retirement savings accounts. But if you have the option of contributing post-tax income to a retirement account, it is well worth considering. That, by definition, is the Roth IRA.﻿﻿
 
The money you contribute to a Roth IRA is taxed upfront, not after you withdraw it. That may seem like a big hit on your disposable income. But the money in a Roth account is tax-free when you withdraw it after retirement. That is, not only do you owe no taxes on your contribution; you owe no taxes on the investment income your money has earned.﻿﻿
 Social Security Administration. "Learn about Social Security Programs." Accessed May 6, 2020. Fidelity. "Fidelity Q1 2019 Retirement Analysis," Page 2. Accessed May 6, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - IRA Contribution Limits." Accessed May 6, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Retirement Topics - 401(k) and Profit-Sharing Plan Contribution Limits." Accessed May 6, 2020. Internal Revenue Service: "IRS provides tax inflation adjustments for tax year 2020" accessed on May 23, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Traditional and Roth IRAs." Accessed May 6, 2020.