
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
If you have poor credit, you’re typically limited to secured credit cards that require you to put down hundreds of dollars as a security deposit. The unsecured Total Visa Credit Card offers an alternative. You can qualify for a credit limit of $300 without a security deposit, and your account activity is reported to the major credit bureaus. However, the card has very expensive fees that can cost you more over the long run than a secured card.
 The Total Visa Credit Card is not one of Investopedia's top rated credit cards. Here is a list of our best credit cards that we think provide better options. Does not require a security deposit Reports to the three major credit bureaus Cash advance fees waived for the first year Expensive fees Limitations on how the card can be used May be liable for $50 of unauthorized purchases 
To put those fees in perspective, you’d pay at least $164 in non-refundable fees during your first year as a cardholder. That’s money you never get back, making this a costly card to have. A lower-cost option is the Capital One Secured Mastercard. It has no annual fee, and, depending on your credit profile, your security deposit may be $49, $99, or $200. Plus, your security deposit is refundable. 
 
The Total Visa Credit Card is for someone with poor credit or little to no credit history who can’t or doesn’t want to put up a deposit for a secured credit card. You can apply for the card online and get a response within seconds. If approved, you’ll have access to an unsecured Visa card that you can use at merchants throughout the United States. 
 
The card has few benefits, but it does allow you to choose your own card design, and it reports your account activity to the major credit bureaus. 
 
The Total Visa Credit Card is issued by The Bank of Missouri. As a small issuer of credit cards, The Bank of Missouri is not included in the J.D. Power Credit Card Satisfaction Study. However, it is accredited by the Better Business Bureau and has an A+ rating. 
