
If you’re a regular international traveler or just planning a single trip out of the country, there's one problem you know you must solve: money. Most countries don’t want your American dollars, so you have to get your hands on some local currency to do your shopping.
 
As the economic markets aren’t always simple to navigate, one dollar usually doesn’t equal one of any other type of currency because the exchange rate depends on a host of factors over which you have no control. You probably don't want to spend a lot of time trying to do the math while you're traveling abroad.
 
That’s what companies such as Travelex are banking on—literally. There are cheaper ways of exchanging your money than Travelex, but few are as convenient. And, as with most purchases, convenience comes with a cost.
 
Travelex is the world’s leading foreign-exchange business, according to its website. The company exchanges currency for 40 million customers each year—about 5,000 every hour. It has more than 1,000 stores and 1,000 ATMs in 26 countries.﻿﻿ You probably know Travelex best as the kiosk you see in some larger airports, seaports, rail stations, and other tourist locations.
 
More than 40% of the world’s travelers—that’s approximately 2.7 billion passengers annually—pass through airports with at least one Travelex location.﻿﻿ If you’re looking for a well-known, reputable brand for exchanging your money, Travelex is a reasonable choice.
 
The company’s main business model is the same as any currency-exchange company. That is, the company makes money on the markup or spread, which is the difference between the buy and sell rates on currencies. Matt Richardson is owner of FX brokerage firm betterFX and a former Travelex employee for 13 years. He explains,
 
During his time at Travelex, Richardson and his fellow agents were given incentives to sell costumers additional, often more expensive, products. “Tellers could earn incentives for encouraging clients to change larger sums,” he says. In addition, “Each teller would be measured for their average transaction size. Incentives were in place for selling the buy-back guarantee, selling Cash Passport, travel insurance, prepaid phone cards, overseas sims, etc.”
 
It’s easy to see that Travelex is profiting from the convenience of exchanging your money as soon as you get off the plane—and it is—but it’s more than that. According to Richardson,
 
Richardson is right. Many airports don’t have set monthly lease rates the way retail locations in a mall do. Anybody wishing to do business with the airport has to bid on the highly valuable space.
 
Travelex doesn’t just operate in airports and other travel hubs; you can find retail locations in other places as well. According to Richardson, it is often better to do business away from airports, though not always. Again, because of the convenience and high overhead of the airport, prices tend to be higher there. And he has another piece of advice, “Travelex also has an online ordering service that allows you to collect from the airport and usually offers better rates than a walk-up service—sometimes by 10% or more.”
 
Judging by Travelex’s website, it wants you to exchange your currency online, but is that a better deal? In many cases, it makes sense because an online company doesn’t have all the overhead costs of a brick-and-mortar location. There’s another reason Travelex wants you to do more business online. According to Richardson,
 
What if you could put your foreign currency on a debit card and have it with you whenever you’re traveling? Even better, what if you ran out of a certain country’s currency but had another currency on the card, and it was automatically exchanged to what you need at that time? The Cash Passport card from Travelex does just that, but is it worth it?
 
Much like a prepaid card, you can only spend what’s on the card, so you can better control your budget. However, the multiple fees are a big drawback. There’s the initial currency exchange fee, a withdrawal fee, possibly an inactivity fee, and if you choose to convert back to dollars and cash out of the card, there’s a fee for that too.﻿﻿ According to Richardson, if you put $1,000 on the card, converted it to British pounds, and then cashed it out later, you could pay nearly 14% in fees. 
 
“Generally speaking, buying currency from the airport or other travel hubs is the most expensive way of buying or selling foreign currency," according to Richardson. You might want to look at online alternatives or apps like Revolut, which can usually offer better rates.﻿﻿
 
A credit card is typically a cheaper way to get funds in a foreign country. The credit card is also safer than carrying a lot of cash around. Richardson offers another suggestion,
 
Remember the value of your time. “Bigger brands are often the most expensive but, equally, driving an hour away to save a few dollars may not really make sense," according to Richardson. Convenience is the most important thing when changing small amounts. But beyond that, it often pays to shop around.
 Travelex. "History of Travelex: About Us." Accessed May 15, 2020. Travelex. "Multi-Currency Cash Passport." Accessed May 15, 2020. Revolut. "About Us." Accessed May 15, 2020.