
Trunk Club is a personal styling service that selects and delivers clothing handpicked by a stylist especially for you. Once you have the delivery in hand, you have five days to decide which items to keep and which to ship back to Trunk Club. There are no shipping or return fees, just a $25 styling fee.
 
Trunk Club was founded in 2009 to serve men who love stylish, quality clothing but hate to spend much time and energy shopping for it, not to mention have a sense style. After five years of serving only men, Trunk Club added a clothing service for women in the summer of 2015. Trunk Club has operated as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the fashion retailer Nordstrom since the retailer acquired it in 2014.
 
Trunk Club is based on a relationship between the customer and a semi-personal stylist. The first thing you do when you sign up with Trunk Club is to create your personal-style profile by answering a few questions about your fit, style, and budget. Next, you chat with a Trunk Club stylist, either by phone or in their chat app, to discuss your personal style and what you want to achieve with the Trunk Club service. Your stylist provides you a list of recommended clothes, which you can view and approve online. You have 48 hours to approve or amend your Trunk preview before it is shipped to you via UPS.
 
After your Trunk arrives, you have five days to try on the clothing items and decide which are worth keeping. There is no obligation to keep any of the items. When you are ready to return the trunk, simply notify Trunk Club to schedule a free pickup at your home. Use the prepaid return shipping label included with your original shipment. Once Trunk Club receives your trunk, it charges you for the clothes you decided to keep. There is a $25 styling fee for every Trunk, but it is waived if you use your Nordstrom credit or debit card.
 
If you prefer, you can make an appointment for a fitting at the company's Clubhouses in Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Washington D.C., Los Angeles, or New York City. Your stylist will show you a selection of clothes that fits your size, style, and spending preferences. You can try everything on and take your favorites home the same day.
 
Trunk Club is not based on a subscription model like some other clothing services. Rather, it delivers trunks only upon request, so you can choose whenever you want a trunk or at a regular monthly or quarterly interval. Shoppers simply need to contact their personal stylist when they are ready to organize another shipment. Since the company assigns each shopper a permanent stylist, subscribers can expect quick improvement in clothing recommendations over time. There is also an option to change a stylist at any time.
 
Trunk Club offers a range of top-quality, time-tested brands for a range of budgets. Their Nordstrom-backed inventory lets you decide how much you want to spend. It carries wardrobe staples like tees, denim, and button-ups ranging from $25 to $300. Sportcoats, dress shoes, and other workwear essentials start around $200.
 
If the clothing fits your price range and the services of a personal stylist sound intriguing, there's really no reason not to give Trunk Club a try. After all, if you don't like any of the clothing, you never have to pay a dime.
