
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 UFB Direct 
UFB Direct is an online-only bank offering deposit accounts and mortgages. It's a division of Axos Bank, which is a digital bank founded in 2000. UFB’s parent bank launched as Bank of Internet USA and rebranded as Axos in 2018. ﻿﻿
 
This comprehensive review will help you determine whether UFB Direct’s accounts are a good fit for your needs.
 Good interest rates on deposit accounts No minimum deposit to open a savings account No bank fees on any ATM in the U.S. Sizeable balance required to get high APY High deposit required to open a money market account Limited account options UFB Direct 
UFB Direct should appeal to most folks who want an online bank account to park their money for long periods of time. It may be a particularly good fit for customers who:
 
UFB offers a limited selection of accounts with a full range of online services: 
 
UFB’s savings account comes with a debit card and does not charge monthly maintenance fees. What is particularly appealing about this account is that you don’t have to deposit a single cent to open one. However, you do need to maintain a bare minimum balance of 0.01 to keep it. You have 60 days after opening an account to transfer the money. The APY rates are as follows:﻿﻿
 
To get the 0.40% APY rate, you’ll need to park at least $10,000 in your savings. For balances that fall under that threshold, you won’t earn any interest. If you anticipate a small windfall of cash in the near future—perhaps by way of an inheritance, sale of an asset, or a bonus at work—you might consider opening an account now. That way you’ll have a place to tuck away that money when it comes.﻿﻿
 
You can use any ATM in the U.S. without paying out-of-network fees. However, there might be other surcharge fees that can’t be reimbursed.
 Axos Bank lumps together all deposit accounts from its different brands—BofI Advisor, Bank X, NetBank, Apartment Bank, Annuitants Federal Bank, Virtus Bank, and UFB Direct—so if you have different accounts within Axos, each won’t be separately insured by the FDIC, which covers $250,000 per account, per depositor. This means that if you have $300,000 combined in different accounts, only $250,000 comes with FDIC protection. 
UFB’s money market account boasts a 0.40% APY but to get that rate, you’ll need to keep at least $25,000 in your account. The rates for UFB’s money market accounts are as follows:﻿﻿
 
UFB’s money market account has a $10 monthly account fee, which is waived if you maintain a daily minimum of $5,000.﻿﻿
 
Banking customers can contact the customer service line seven days a week, 24-hours a day. There is also the standard option to reach out through the website and via a mobile app. Customers also can send a message through the dashboard.﻿﻿
 
While UFB offers different customer service options, its parent Axos ranks below average in customer satisfaction. Per the J.D. Power 2019 Direct Banking Satisfaction survey, Axos scored 811 out of 1,000 points. That’s a tad below the industry average of 860.
 
You can open an account online. You’ll want to have a valid ID on hand, and basic information such as your Social Security number. Prospective account holders need to be at least 18 years old to apply.﻿﻿
 
For Teen Checking, a minor can be between 13 and 17. However, a parent or guardian needs to be a joint owner on the account.
 
Have questions and want to receive more information before making a decision? You can fill out a request form on its website.
 Unlike some financial institutions, UFB does a credit check before you get approved for an account. So if you have a security freeze on your accounts, you’ll need to lift it before proceeding. UFB Direct could be a good choice if you have a large sum of money you would like stowed away in an online-only account. You’ll also need to mind the rules to avoid the monthly maintenance fee and earn the top APY available. Those who don’t have as much to put into a deposit account would probably fare better with a bank with lower minimum balance requirements. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of banks. We collected over 20 data points across more than 80 banks including products available, interest rates, fees, and accessibility to ensure that our content helps users make the right decision for their savings and banking needs.
 Axos Bank. “History of Axos Bank.” Accessed April 21, 2020.