
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Upgrade Card is different from other credit cards, combining the convenience of a Visa card with the lower rates and fixed payments of a personal loan. When you sign up for the card, you’re granted a personal line of credit. At the end of each month, your purchases are combined and your balance is placed into an installment plan with a fixed monthly payment. With no fees, it’s a different approach to credit that may appeal to people who are wary of traditional credit cards or might have trouble getting one.
 The Upgrade Card is not one of our top-rated credit cards. You can review our list of best credit cards for what we think are better options. No fees to obtain or use the card Predictable monthly payments Useful alternative to balance transfer offers Most applicants won’t qualify for the maximum credit line No rewards or additional benefits No grace period 
If your credit isn’t perfect and you’re looking for an alternative to subprime credit cards, the Upgrade Card may be a good option for you. It offers the flexibility and convenience of a credit card but the lower costs and predictable payments of a personal loan. 
 
There are no fees, and you’ll repay your charges over 12 to 60 months. By having a fixed repayment term, you’ll be committed to repaying your debt by a set deadline, and you may pay less in interest charges than you would with a traditional credit card. 
 
Because the Upgrade Card isn’t a standard credit card, it doesn’t offer the usual benefits you might expect from credit cards. However it does allow you to add your Upgrade Card to Apple Pay or Google Pay, and you can use it at contactless terminals. 
 
The Upgrade Card is issued by Sutton Bank and is licensed by Visa. As a small, privately held, community bank, Sutton Bank was not rated in the 2019 J.D. Power Credit Card Customer Satisfaction Study. 
 
Upgrade was launched in 2017 and specializes in personal loans and personal lines of credit. Since its inception, it has issued $3 billion in credit to customers. The company introduced the Upgrade Card in 2019, so it’s a very new financial product. 
