
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Upgrade is a direct online lender that opened its doors in 2017. It offers personal loans and a line of credit known as the Upgrade Card. Headquartered in San Francisco, the company has offices in Chicago, Montreal, and Phoenix. According to its website, 8 million people applied for an Upgrade Card or loan within two years.
 
Upgrade’s mission is to reduce fees through its low-cost credit products. The company strives to educate customers about their finances by offering credit monitoring and education, which may help users improve their credit scores over time. It has plans to offer mobile banking in the future.﻿﻿
 
Depending on your credit history, you may qualify for APR options ranging from 7.99% to 35.97%.﻿﻿ Upgrade offers personal loan amounts from $1,000 to $35,000 and loan terms from 36 to 60 months. Upgrade is looking for a minimum credit score of 620, according to a representative, but the company may consider other factors to determine your eligibility.
 Prequalification Available Co-applicant Allowed Quick Funding Payment Flexibility Origination Fee Less Competitive APR Late Fee 
Upgrade offers fixed-rate personal loans and personal lines of credit. 
 
After you choose a personal loan offer and get approved, Upgrade may transfer the funds within one business day. Nevertheless, it may take up to four business days until you can access the money.
 
Upgrade has an easy online application process. This includes the ability to check rates with a soft pull on your credit—which won’t hurt your credit score.
 
You can start the process by picking your loan amount and the purpose. The second step includes some basic information:
 
Next, Upgrade asks for your annual income. This may include alimony, child support, or separate maintenance payments. There is also a box for other types of income.
 
Self-employed applicants need more documentation, which may include but isn’t limited to:﻿﻿
 
The last step before checking rates is creating an Upgrade account by entering your email address and password. You will also have to check a box to agree to Upgrade’s policies and authorizations.
 
After selecting an offer, Upgrade will complete a hard inquiry on your credit to process your application. This will temporarily impact your credit score. The company may ask for more information to complete your application. To speed up the process, Upgrade recommends regularly checking your account’s To-Do List for document requests.﻿﻿
 
If you’re looking to score a better interest rate on an existing personal loan, you won’t be able to refinance with Upgrade, according to a representative.
 Upgrade may be a good option if your credit score is above 620 and you qualify for the company’s lowest APR. It may also be a good fit if you want to apply with a co-applicant. However, borrowers with a good to excellent credit score may avoid an origination fee and qualify for lower APRs elsewhere.   Before applying for a personal loan, you should always compare lenders. Depending on your creditworthiness, you may have a lot more options than you expect. A lower APR or smaller origination fee could save your family hundreds of dollars over the life of the loan. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Upgrade. "Are there any fees?" Accessed September 30, 2020. Upgrade.com. "What is the typical loan process through Upgrade?: Footnote." Accessed September 30, 2020. Upgrade. "Are there any fees?" Accessed September 30, 2020. Upgrade. "Are there any fees?" Accessed September 30, 2020. Upgrade. "Are there any fees?" Accessed September 30, 2020. Upgrade.com. "How do joint applications work?" Accessed April 27, 2020. Upgrade.com "Personal Loans Up to $35,000: How Much Can I Borrow?" Accessed April 27, 2020.