
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The USAA Cashback Rewards Plus American Express earns 5% cash back on your first $3,000 in combined gas station and military-base purchases yearly, 2% cash back on your first $3,000 in grocery purchases yearly, and 1% cash back on all other purchases. It doesn’t charge an annual fee, foreign transaction fees, or penalty APR.
 The USAA Cashback Rewards Plus American Express Card is not one of our top-rated cash back credit cards. You can review our list of the best cash back credit cards for what we think are better options. Bonus cash-back categories for frequent expenses Low threshold for redeeming cash back Minimal fees Decent travel and purchase benefits USAA customer service is exceptional Amounts eligible for bonus cash back are lower than average spending No one-time offer Must be from a military family to apply 
First and foremost, the USAA Cashback Rewards Plus American Express is for military families who want to enjoy bonus cash back rates for spending on gas and military bases. Up to a limit of $3,000 a year in spending, those purchases earn 5% in cash back, a rate that’s very hard to beat. Off the base, or after you reach the spending limit for those 5% purchases, it’s also a good card you can use for groceries. Food purchases will earn you 2% in cash back, a rate that bests most cash back cards that offer a flat rate on all purchases, though some cards that have tiered rewards offer more cash back for supermarket spending.  
 
It’s also a card for such families who may lack other cards that provide such useful and cost-saving travel benefits as the absence of foreign-transaction fees and insurance for rental cars, baggage delays, and travel accidents.
 
The USAA Cashback Rewards Plus American Express card offers 5% on the first $3,000 of qualifying gas and military-base purchases each calendar year. This does not include truck-stop transactions but does include other merchants defined as primarily selling gasoline to consumers. Military-base purchases include those made at commissaries, exchanges, and shoppettes. 
 
You’ll earn 2% cash back on the first $3,000 of grocery purchases each calendar year. This typically includes neighborhood grocery stores and supermarkets. Food bought at discount stores, wholesale stores, and warehouse clubs, such as Walmart, Costco, and Sam’s Club, do not qualify. 
 
You can also earn unlimited 1% cash back on all other purchases. If you voluntarily close your account while it is in good standing, you have 90 calendar days to call 800-980-8722 to redeem any remaining cash back on your account.
 
You can begin to redeem cash back once you have earned at least $1.00 in rewards, and then continue to do so in increments as low as $1.00. You may redeem cash back by calling 800-980-8722 or by visiting the USAA Rewards Service Center online after you log in to your online account.
 
Cash back can be redeemed as long as your account is open, in good standing and you’re not in violation of the USAA credit card agreement. If your account is delinquent, not in good standing or you are violating the USAA credit card agreement, you can only redeem your cash back as a credit to your account by calling 800-980-8722.
 
Making the most of this card is simple enough. It begins with putting all gas and military-base purchases and those at supermarkets on the card until you reach the $3,000 spending limit for 5% bonus rewards in each of those two categories. Once you reach this limit, you could continue putting purchases on this card to earn unlimited 1% cash back, but other cards offer higher cash back rates on all other purchases.
 
You can redeem your cash back as you earn it as long as you’ve accumulated at least $1.00 in rewards. Alternatively, you can save your rewards until you wish to cash out at a higher amount in $1.00 increments.
