
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Founded in 1922 and headquartered in San Antonio, USAA is a members-only bank serving the military community.﻿﻿ Personal loans are available starting at a fixed rate of 7.24% APR. Applicants need to be members to apply—to qualify you’ll need to be a qualifying member of the military or a family member of one.  
 
We’ve reviewed relevant and important details, including fees and loan amounts to help you make a decision about whether USAA is the right fit for your financial situation. 
 Ability to receive loan proceeds quickly No application fee Autopay discount available Access for members only Low maximum personal loan amount No soft credit inquiry available 
USAA allows borrowers to use their personal loans for almost all purposes. This can include home improvement projects, relocation expenses, car repairs or other types of major purchases. Although USAA doesn’t have a separate debt consolidation loan, you can take out a personal loan from the lender to pay off existing high-interest debt..
 
The lender may approve your loan within a few minutes and you’ll be sent your loan proceeds as soon as 24 business hours later.
 
The lender only grants personal loans to its members. To qualify, you’ll need to be a qualifying U.S. military member or are an eligible family member — this includes those on active duty, veterans, cadets, those in the Guard or Reserve, or midshipmen.
 
Borrowers can receive a 0.25% discount off their final rate if they opt into autopay.
 
USAA requires applicants to be a member to apply for a loan. The entire process can be done online or over the phone by calling 800-531-8722. Here’s what to expect: 
 
Once USAA approves your loan, sign your loan documents and your loans will be deposited into your USAA bank account as soon as 24 hours. 
