
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
USAA is a bank that offers multiple financial services and products to military service members and their families. Besides banking and investing accounts, it’s also a car insurance company.
 
USAA sells car insurance to customers online and over the phone rather than through agents. With multiple discounts, USAA members may be able to save money by switching to USAA auto insurance. According to the company, on average members saved $707 on their annual premium when they switched to USAA car insurance.
 Multiple premium discounts available Rideshare insurance available Multiple policy discounts available Must be a USAA member to qualify Online quotes not available to nonmembers No agent access 
USAA offers the following coverage options:
 
USAA offers rideshare insurance in select states for as little as $6 per month. You can add rideshare coverage to your existing auto policy if you drive for Uber or Lyft, and it provides essential protection when you’re not covered by rideshare company’s commercial policies.
 
Several factors affect your insurance premiums. When evaluating your auto policy, insurance companies consider the following things:
 
USAA has multiple discounts that can reduce your car insurance premiums.
 
USAA auto insurance is available in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. However, coverage limits and discount availability can vary by state.
 
USAA’s rideshare insurance is only available in the following 37 states (and the District of Columbia): Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Maryland, Maine, Minnesota, Missouri, Mississippi, North Dakota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Nevada, Ohio, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. 
 
While other companies rely on insurance agents to sell to customers, USAA sells car insurance online and over the phone. It doesn’t have insurance agents you can meet with face-to-face, but its customer service team is readily available.
 
Customer support can be reached at 800-531-8722 during the following times:
 
USAA also has a mobile app you can use to manage your policy. You can get car insurance quotes, request insurance ID cards, report claims, and even request roadside assistance. The app is available for both Android and iOS phones.
 
USAA has an outstanding reputation in the insurance industry. AM Best is the credit agency that issues Financial Strength Ratings (FSRs), which measure the reliability and financial stability of insurance companies. It awarded USAA an A++ (Superior) rating, its highest possible rating, recognizing the company’s strong operating performance and high customer retention.﻿﻿
 
Because USAA car insurance isn’t available to everyone, the company was not ranked against other insurance companies in the J.D. Power 2019 U.S. Auto Claims Satisfaction Study. However, J.D. Power granted USAA a 900 rating, the highest rating of any insurance company.﻿﻿
 
Each year the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) releases insurance companies’ complaint ratios, a number that reflects the amount of complaints it received relative to the companies’ market shares. The NAIC considers a ratio of 1.0 to be average. Anything above 1.0 means that a company received more complaints than is typical for its size, while a ratio below 1.0 means the reverse. USAA’s complaint ratio for 2019 was 0.69, which is better than the industry average.﻿﻿
 For the past three years USAA has had much-better-than-average complaint ratios. 
USAA has a plethora of insurance products, some of which are:
 
You can file a claim over the phone, through the mobile app, or online on the company’s website. Filing a claim online or through the app is quick; according to USAA, it only takes about 15 minutes. A claims representative will be assigned to your case automatically. You can enter information about what happened, upload pictures of the accident scene and damage to your vehicle or property, set an inspection date and time, and get a rental car, if needed.
 
In some cases you can get an estimate back in as little as four hours and proceed with repairs. You can go to a USAA-preferred shop or choose your own. If you decide to select your own repair shop, USAA will send you a check directly rather than paying the shop.
 
You can cancel your USAA insurance policy without paying a cancellation fee. To do so, call 800-531-8722 to speak with a representative and ask to cancel your policy. You’ll be asked for your policy number, name, address, date of birth, and what date you would like your cancellation to take place.
 
To get a USAA Insurance quote, you must be a USAA member. To join, you must provide your date of birth, contact information, Social Security number, and details about you or your family member’s military service. The site will then prompt you to create a user ID and password. Once your account is created, you can proceed with getting a car insurance quote.
 
While USAA has excellent coverage options and multiple policy discounts, it’s not available to everyone, and it doesn’t have insurance agents. USAA car insurance is only for USAA members, so if you are not a current or former military member, or the spouse or child of one, you’ll have to look elsewhere for auto insurance.
 If you are qualified for membership in the USAA, its auto insurance may be the right choice for you. With multiple coverage options and several premium discounts available, you can get a policy that meets your needs.