
Similar to any government website, ssa.gov, the official site of the Social Security Administration, is full of helpful information. Finding what you need in the long list of publications, forms, and other web resources, however, is not always easy. Here is a guide to help you navigate the site based on some of the most common questions people have.
 
The links included in each answer will take you to the applicable pages and forms on the Social Security website.
 
A Social Security number (SSN) is a nine-digit number that the U.S. government issues to all U.S. citizens and eligible U.S. residents who apply for one.﻿﻿ The number allows the government to keep track of your lifetime earnings and the number of years worked. You must apply for a number and a card in person because the Social Security office has to verify certain documents.﻿﻿ You can, however, go online to complete and print the application to take to your local office.﻿﻿
 
If you need a replacement card, you may be able to apply online if you are 18 or older, have a driver’s license or state-issued identification card, are not requesting any change in your Social Security card, have a U.S. mailing address, and have created an online “my Social Security account.”﻿﻿
 
U.S. territories and the following 8 states do not yet participate in the online renewal program:﻿﻿
 
Before you visit an office, check the website to see if you can complete all or some of the paperwork online. You are also likely to need supporting documents when you arrive, such as a birth certificate or passport for identification.
 
First, determine if you’re eligible for Social Security (not everyone is). If you are, you can apply for Social Security and Medicare.﻿﻿
 
Yes, but your Social Security benefits may be reduced. This page provides an overview of working and receiving benefits, including benefit calculations and changes that might take place once you reach full retirement age.﻿﻿
 
The average monthly benefit for retired workers as of January 2020 was $1,505.50, but the benefit you will receive is based on various factors.﻿﻿ You can use the retirement estimator to calculate your benefits, but read the information before you begin. For example, to use the calculator, you need to have earned 40 credits.﻿﻿
 The average monthly Social Security benefit for retired workers as of January 2020. 
As of 2020, you receive one credit for each $1,410 you earn in a year.﻿﻿ You need 40 credits to qualify for full retirement benefits. You can receive a maximum of four credits per year.﻿﻿
 
Whether your benefits are affected by a pension depends on where the pension is from. Pensions from government jobs in which you did not pay Social Security taxes can be affected. Also, read about the windfall elimination provision.﻿﻿ This provision may apply to you as well.
 
Probably, but the rules are complicated. Read about spousal benefits and check out the survivor planning information. Your children can receive benefits too. Read about the eligibility requirements.﻿﻿ Social Security has numerous FAQs about benefits for spouses, children, and others who might be eligible to receive payments.﻿﻿
 Spouses who do not qualify for Social Security benefits may nevertheless receive spousal benefits of their own if their husbands or wives qualify for Social Security. 
Social Security provides disability benefits for people of all ages, with rules enumerated in a 15-page document.﻿﻿ You can apply for disability benefits online. Before completing the application, you should read this five-page publication that includes instructions and frequently asked questions.﻿﻿
 
Yes, you can. Social Security may allow you a nine-month trial period to see if you’re able to work.﻿﻿
 
No. Once you reach full retirement age, you will lose disability benefits and gain retirement benefits.﻿﻿ Assistance for children includes children whose parents are receiving disability benefits and children who are themselves disabled.
 
Some people’s disabilities clearly meet Social Security’s definition of disabled. Those people may be eligible to receive benefits more rapidly. The website has an extensive section on compassionate allowance.﻿﻿
 
These initials stand for supplemental security income, which provides cash assistance to the aged, the blind, and the disabled to meet basic living needs. It is not paid for by Social Security taxes. First, verify that you are eligible.﻿﻿ Then, learn about the application procedure.﻿﻿
 
You can do this online.﻿﻿ Log in to your online account or contact your bank. You can also complete a direct deposit form, print it, and take it to your local Social Security office.
 
If you owe child support, alimony, taxes, or restitution, Social Security may garnish your wages to meet those obligations.﻿﻿
 
Some people have to pay taxes on their wages but never on more than 85% of their benefits.﻿﻿ You can find basic information along with information about voluntarily withholding.﻿﻿
 
The links above answer the most common questions, but you can find more answers by first going to the frequently asked questions page.﻿﻿ If you do not find the answer there, search the publications section.﻿﻿ If you still have questions, call your local Social Security office.
 Social Security Administration. "Social Security Number and Card." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Learn what documents you will need to get a Social Security Card." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration "Application for A Social Security Card." Social Security Administration. "Request a Replacement Social Security Number (SSN) Card Online." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Apply for Benefits." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Getting Benefits While Working." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Research, Statistics & Policy Analysis." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Retirement Estimator." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "How You Earn Credits," Page 2. Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Social Security Credits." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Windfall Elimination Provision," Pages 1-2. Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner: Survivors | If You Are The Survivor." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "FAQ: Spouses, Children, Survivors." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Disability Benefits." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Apply Online for Disability Benefits." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Trial Work Period." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "What You Need to Know When You Get Social Security Disability Benefits," Page 10. Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Compassionate Allowances." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Understanding Supplemental Security Income SSI Eligibility Requirements -- 2019 Edition." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Understanding Supplemental Security Income SSI Application Process and Applicants' Rights -- 2019 Edition." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Social Security Direct Deposit." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Frequently Asked Questions." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner | Income Taxes And Your Social Security Benefit." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner | Withholding Income Tax From Your Social Security Benefits." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Frequently Asked Questions." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Publications." Accessed Feb. 24, 2020.