
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Founded in 2015, Varo is an all-mobile firm that offers checking and savings accounts. As a startup, Varo seeks to disrupt traditional banking (even of the online-only variety) by providing monthly-fee-free accounts and an entirely mobile experience.
 No-monthly-fee checking and savings accounts No-fee overdraft Access to 55,000 Allpoint ATMs Impressive savings rate No online platform Cash deposit only available through a third-party that charges fees No checks Only two deposit accounts available 
Varo will appeal to customers who prefer a mobile experience, want to avoid fees, and want a competitive savings rate. Specifically, Varo will be right for customers who:
 
As a mobile-only startup, Varo keeps its offerings very simple. The only accounts Varo has are savings and checking.
 
The sole Varo savings account is a high-yield account with no fees whatsoever with which savers can earn up to a 2.80% APY. To open a Varo savings account, you will first need to open a checking account (known as the “Varo Bank Account”).
 
In addition, the fee structure is a little confusing. To earn the 2.80% APY, you will need to meet the following three requirements:
 
If you do not meet these requirements, your rate is 0.81% APY. This means that savings account holders who keep a balance greater than $10,000 (but meet the other two requirements) are not eligible for the 2.80% APY. Once you reach a $10,000 balance or greater, your rate drops down to 0.81%. On the plus side, there is no minimum balance required on the Varo savings account, and you need no more than $0.01 in your account to earn interest.
 
Though you are required to have a Varo checking account in order to open the Varo savings account, the institution offers some benefits with this structure. Specifically, Varo has two automatic savings options to help encourage you to reach your savings goals.
 
The only checking account option is officially known as a “Varo Bank Account,” and it packs quite an impressive punch for a fairly simple offering. The benefits of this account include all of the following:
 
While the Varo Bank Account has a lot to offer the right customer, it’s not going to be a good fit for everyone. The fact that you have to pay a third-party to deposit cash means that anyone who regularly receives cash may want to look elsewhere for a basic checking account.
 
It’s also a good idea to double check if there are Allpoint ATMs in your area before signing up for a Varo Bank Account. Through a network of 55,000 ATMs (42,000 in the United States) covers a lot of territory, that doesn’t mean that everyone can easily find an ATM near them. The one exception to this fee-free account is the $2.50 out-of-network ATM fee, which could be an expensive exception if there are no convenient Allpoint ATMs near you.
