
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The newly launched Verizon Visa Signature Card has no annual fee, and cardholders can earn up to 4% Verizon Dollars in select spending categories. Plus, you can get up to $100 in billing credits as a new cardholder. Your rewards are redeemable for Verizon wireless bill payments and device and accessory purchases.
 New cardholders can get up to a total of $100 in credit applied to their Verizon wireless bills. The reimbursement will show up as a $4.17 monthly credit on eligible Verizon Wireless bills over a period of 24 months. The Verizon Visa Signature Card is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. High rewards rate on select spending categories Two TravelPass days per calendar year Up to $10 off per month on each eligible account Must be a Verizon customer Limited redemption options No introductory APR 
For a card with no annual fee, the ability to earn up to 4% in rewards is a valuable perk. There are no rotating spending categories to keep track of, and you don’t have to activate spending categories to start earning a higher rate. You’ll automatically earn rewards whenever you use your card. 
 
Unlike the rewards you can earn with many other credit cards, Verizon Dollars cannot be redeemed for gift cards, statement credits, bank deposits, or travel. 
 
Verizon Communications is the largest wireless carrier in the United States in terms of the number of subscribers. If you’re a Verizon wireless customer with a monthly bill for 10 lines or less, the Verizon Visa Signature Card could be a useful addition to your wallet. 
 
The card has no annual fee. You can use the card to earn extra rewards on gas, groceries, dining out, and Verizon purchases, and then redeem your rewards to pay your Verizon wireless bill or upgrade your devices. 
 
As a new cardholder, you’re eligible for a one-time offer with the Verizon Visa Signature Card. When you use the card to pay your Verizon wireless or Verizon Fios bill, you’ll get a monthly credit of $4.17 credited to your bill for 24 consecutive billing cycles. You can qualify for up to $100 in billing credits.
 
You’ll earn the following rewards with your Verizon Visa Signature Card: 
 
You can redeem your Verizon Dollar rewards online through your Verizon wireless account, at Verizon-operated stores, or over the phone with Verizon representatives. Your rewards can be redeemed in the following ways: 
 
To get the most value from your Verizon Visa Signature Card, use it whenever you purchase gas or groceries, or dine out at restaurants. Also use it to pay your Verizon wireless bill. To show how your rewards can add up, consider this example. 
 
Here is how much the typical consumer spends each year, and the corresponding rewards rate with the Verizon Visa Card
 
If you spent those same amounts with the Verizon Visa Signature Card, you’d earn $384.53 in rewards, which would most likely cover several months’ worth of your Verizon wireless bills or a down payment on a new device. 
 
When you apply for the Verizon Visa Signature Card, you’re automatically considered for both it and the Verizon Visa Signature Card. If approved for the Verizon Visa Signature Card, you’ll get access to additional card benefits, including: 
