
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Vio Bank is the online-only division of MidFirst Bank. Headquartered in Oklahoma City, MidFirst was established in 1911. With more than $21.6 billion in assets, it is one of the largest, privately-owned banks in the U.S.﻿﻿
 Competitive interest rates No monthly account fees Low minimums to open an account No debit card or check writing capabilities CDs automatically renew Only savings accounts and CDs offered 
Vio Bank is best for customers who want an easy, no-frills option to put money away. If you want a bank that offers a wide range of deposit accounts and financial products and services, you’ll probably want to look elsewhere. Vio Bank is particularly best for those who: 
 
Vio Bank offers the ease of transferring funds online between accounts. Or if you prefer, you can also deposit money from a different bank by depositing a check. Like other online-only banks that are offshoots of a larger bank, Vio offers the following types of deposit accounts:
 
There is a lot to like about Vio Bank’s high yield savings account. For starters, there is no monthly service fee and you only need $100 to open an account. The APY is the same on all balances—0.76%.﻿﻿
 
However, the account does not come with a debit card. While a debit card is typically linked to a checking account, some banks do offer debit cards that are linked to a savings account.
 
And like most savings accounts, due to federal regulations, you can only make six withdrawals a month. If you go over the limit, you’ll get charged a $10 fee per withdrawal. Online statements are free, but if you prefer a paper statement mailed to you, there is a $5 monthly charge.﻿﻿
 To enroll in mobile banking, you'll need to first enroll in online banking. 
If you are looking to set aside funds and earn some interest a CD might be a good choice for you. The terms for the CDs that Vio Bank offers range from six months to 10 years. All CDs require a $500 minimum deposit. Depending on the term of the CD, rates are as low as 0.15% and as high as 0.70%.﻿﻿
 
If you need to pull money out before the CD matures, you’ll pay an early withdrawal penalty. The early withdrawal fees for CDs are:﻿﻿
 
A caveat with Vio Bank's CDs is that they automatically roll over. If you want the funds from your CD, you’ll need to contact a customer rep within 10 days after the maturity date. If you choose to go this route, you can either invest the funds in another account, or withdraw the funds altogether.﻿﻿
 7-31 days 
In the 2019, J.D. Power U.S. Retail Banking Satisfaction Study, Vio’s parent, MidFirst Bank, received the highest retail banking satisfaction score in the Southwest. ﻿﻿
 
Customer service can be reached seven days a week at 888-999-9170. The hours are: 
 
You can also reach support through an online chat session, which you can access through Vio's website. Customer service reps via this route are available 24/7.
 
To get started, you can fill out an account application online. The process is a standard one, and you’ll need to provide your mailing address, Social Security number, and driver’s license. 
 MidFirst Bank lumps together all deposit accounts from its different brands, so if you have accounts at Vio and its parent each won’t be separately insured by the FDIC, which covers $250,000 per account, per depositor. Vio Bank could be a strong choice if you’re looking to stash away some savings. As far as deposit accounts go, interest rates are competitive for its high-yield savings account, you don’t need a large sum of money to get started, and there aren’t any monthly fees. But if you’re looking for a bank with brick-and-mortar locations, a suite of banking capabilities, and a wide range of financial products and deposit accounts, Vio Bank probably isn’t the best choice for you.