
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Wells Fargo Rewards credit card offers excellent rewards on gas, groceries, and drugstore purchases up to $12,500 for the first six months after opening the card. It also has an above-average 15-month 0% APR promotional period for new purchases and balance transfers made within 120 days of account opening. There's no annual fee, but after the first six months the rewards rate drops to 1 point per dollar spent on all purchases.
 5x rewards points earned for up to $12,500 spent on gas, grocery, and drugstore purchases for the first 6 months and 1x points on other purchases. The Wells Fargo Rewards Card is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Excellent bonus category rewards Decent 0% APR offer on purchases and balance transfers Cell phone protection Poor ongoing rewards Rewards have redemption threshold No one-time offer 
The Wells Fargo Rewards card is best for individuals and families looking for a way to boost the rewards they earn on groceries, gas, and drugstores, at least for a short period of time. That’s because spending heavily in this card's bonus categories during the first six months of card ownership can yield a significant number of points. For example, spending $6,000 within six months would earn you 30,000 points. We estimate that those points are worth $300 when redeemed for cash back or other purchases (travel, gift cards, merchandise and online auctions) through the GoFarRewards Wells Fargo rewards program.
 
Because it also has a 15-month 0% APR offer on balance transfers and new purchases, this card can also be a valuable option if you're interested in paying down high-interest credit card debt or financing new purchases. Just keep in mind that there's a balance transfer fee of at least 3% of the amount transferred. That’s not an uncommon fee, but it can add up.
 
This card is also worth considering if you lack insurance on your cell phone. It extends $600 in coverage, provided you use it to pay your monthly bill. The coverage only applies to a total loss when the phone is stolen, and there are a few other caveats. But coverage like this can offer some reassurance if something happens to your cell phone.
 
This card earns 5 points per dollar during the first six months from the date the account is opened on groceries, drugstores, and gas stations up to $12,500 in purchases. All other purchases on the card earn 1 point per dollar spent, including during the six month introductory period. 
 
 You have five years to use any points earned.
 
Rewards can be redeemed through Wells Fargo's GoFarRewards Program in a number of ways, including for:
 
In order to redeem for cash, you must first meet a $25 minimum threshold. You can get cash at Wells Fargo ATMs, as a paper check or as a deposit or credit to a qualifying account. Cash back redemption options start at 2,000 points for $20 cash back at ATMs or 2,500 points for $25 cash back when redeemed online or over the phone.
 
Points can be pooled with family members and friends who earn GoFarRewards points. They can also be gifted to Wells Fargo customers who have a Wells Fargo credit card that earns GoFarRewards. You can also donate your rewards.
 
Generally, each point is worth 0.01 cents, according to Investopedia's points valuation survey.
 
You can’t transfer GoFarRewards points to other loyalty programs. But they can be transferred to another account you own, other Wells Fargo customers with a GoFarRewards account, and to a Wells Fargo rewards pool. 
 
In order to maximize rewards with the Wells Fargo Rewards card, make sure to immediately start using the card for all of your grocery, gas, and drugstore purchases, since you earn 5 points per dollar up to $12,500 in those categories only for the first six months. You can use this card for other purchases as well. Just keep in mind that the rewards on those purchases earn a fifth of what you'll earn in the bonus categories.
 
Because this card’s bonus rewards categories come with time and spending constraints, consider timing your opening of this card to correlate with upcoming expenses. For example, perhaps you have a road trip coming up where you can use this card for all gas purchases, or maybe you expect your grocery bill to increase within the coming months. 
 
Finally, take advantage of this card's travel benefits. Using extras like cell phone protection, travel accident insurance, and an auto rental collision waiver adds more overall value to the card.
 
In order to get an idea of the points you can earn with this card during the first year of ownership, let's say you only use this card for grocery, gas, and drugstore purchases. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average household spends around $375 per month, or $4,500 per year, on food at home. If you spent another $100 on gas per month and $20 at drugstores, you'd earn 17,820 points during the first year worth $178 when redeemed for cash back or other purchases through Wells Fargo's rewards program.
 
Our calculation accounts for the bonus points you'd earn on those categories during the first six months of account ownership. But it doesn't factor in the 1 point per dollar you'd earn for other miscellaneous purchases on this card.
 
The most aspirational case for using this card is meeting the $12,500 spending threshold on bonus categories within six months. But that's an unrealistic goal for most. In order to accomplish that, you would need to spend nearly $2,100 per month on a combination of groceries, gas, and drugstore purchases. Most households spend far less on those categories, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 
Instead, let's assume that in addition to $375 in groceries and $100 in gas per month, your prescription drug expenses are a little more considerable, costing you $50 each month. Let’s further assume you take a road trip that costs you $200 in gas during the first six months after you open this card. You'd earn a total of 19,900 points with this card worth $199. Again, that's factoring in the bonus rewards and not accounting for the 1 point per dollar you'd earn on other purchases.
 
Wells Fargo ranks ninth out of 11 card issuers on the 2019 J.D. Power Credit Card Customer Satisfaction Study. Its score of 783 is below the national issuer average of 806.   
