
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money. 
The Wells Fargo Visa Signature card has no annual fee and offers 5 points per dollar on grocery, gas, and drugstore purchases of up to $12,500 for the first six months after opening the account. There's also a 15-month 0% APR promotion period for purchases and balance transfers made within the first 120 days. The card lacks a one-time offer, but each point you earn is worth 50% more when redeemed for airfare purchases. That feature makes this card stand apart from the nearly identical Wells Fargo Rewards card.
 5x rewards points earned for up to $12,500 spent on gas, grocery, and drugstore purchases for the first 6 months and 1x points on other purchases. The Wells Fargo Visa Signature Card is not one of our top-rated rewards credit cards. You can review our list of the best rewards credit cards for what we think are better options. Outstanding bonus rewards Points are worth more when redeemed for airfare Above-average 0% APR offer Below-average ongoing rewards No one-time offer 
The Wells Fargo Visa Signature card is a good fit for people who currently spend, or plan to spend, a lot on gas, groceries, and drugstores. It offers high rewards earnings on those categories during the first six months, giving new cardholders a way to quickly boost their points balance.
 
Because points with this card are worth 50% more when redeemed for airfare, it's also a solid choice for people who want to earn rewards for travel without paying an annual fee.
 
In addition, this card could work well for anyone interested in transferring high-interest credit card debt from another card or financing a major purchase, since it has a 15-month 0% APR promotional period. However, note that it does charge a balance transfer fee of 3% or $5, whichever is greater, for the first 120 days, after which the fee increases to 5%, with a minimum of $5.
 
For the first six months after opening their account, cardholders earn 5 points per dollar on gas station, grocery, and drugstore purchases, up to $12,500 in net purchases. Any other purchases outside those categories made during the introductory period earn 1 point per dollar. After the promotional period ends, the ongoing rate on all purchases is 1 point per dollar. Unused points expire after five years.
 
Wells Fargo offers several options for redeeming points through its GoFarRewards program, including travel, gift cards, merchandise, online auctions, and cash back.
 
Typically, Wells Fargo GoFarRewards are worth 1 cent each, regardless of how they are redeemed. In other words, 100 points are worth $1. However, points have 50% more value when you redeem them for airfare, increasing the rate to 1.5 cents per point. For example, you could redeem 20,000 points for $300 in airfare. That means you’ll get the most value out of your points by using them only for flights. 
 
Automatic redemptions are available in $25, or 2,500-point, increments by phone or online. Redemptions through a Wells Fargo ATM are available in increments of $20, or 2,000 points. 
 
GoFarRewards points can't be transferred to loyalty programs. However, you can send them to another Wells Fargo customer who’s part of the GoFarRewards program, move points between your own accounts, or add them to a Wells Fargo rewards pool.
 
Getting the most out of rewards with the Wells Fargo Signature Visa card means using it for every gas, grocery, and drugstore purchase during the first six months after obtaining the card. Each purchase made in those categories earns 5 points per dollar, which can add up quickly. 
 
If your budget allows, spend enough to reach the $12,500 threshold on bonus category rewards, which would max out the number of points you can earn at the bonus rate.
 
Next, focus on using your GoFarRewards to pay for flights. Doing so will get you 50% more value out of each point. For example, 50,000 points are worth $750 when redeemed for airfare, but only $500 when used in other ways. 
 
Let's say you use this card primarily for its bonus categories during the first six months, spending $375 on food at home (about average, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics), $100 on gas, and $20 at drugstores. You'd earn 14,850 points, which would be worth $222.75 when redeemed for flight purchases. Any purchases you make outside of the bonus categories would add another 1 point per dollar to your total.
 
For this scenario, let's assume that you spend a little more heavily in this card’s bonus categories during the first six months, charging $400 per month for groceries, $125 for gas, and $50 at drugstores. We'll further assume that you plan to go on a road trip that will use $200 in gas. In total, you'd earn 18,250 points worth $273.75 when redeemed for airfare.
 
 Again, that doesn't include the 1 point per dollar you’d earn on purchases outside those categories.
 
In the 2019 J.D. Power U.S. Credit Card Satisfaction Study, Wells Fargo received a score of 783 out of 1,000 and ranked ninth out of 11 national card issues. Its score was well under the national issuer average of 806.
