
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 Wells Fargo 
Our Take
 
While it doesn’t charge origination, application, or late fees, Wells Fargo has higher interest rates than you can find with other private lenders, and it has strict limits on how much you can borrow. And Wells Fargo has just one repayment option for most student loans. Because of its drawbacks, most borrowers will be better off working with other lenders with more options and competitive interest rates.
 No application, origination, or late fees Customers can qualify for automatic payment and loyalty interest rate discounts Parent loans can be forgiven if the student is permanently disabled Interest rates may be higher than you’d get with federal loans Strict limits on total education debt permitted No alternative repayment options Wells Fargo 
While federal student loans are a popular financing option because of their low interest rates and repayment benefits, private student loans can play a key role in paying for your education. Federal loans often have limits on how much you can borrow, so private loans can fill a gap and help you finish your degree. 
 
Wells Fargo offers private student loans for undergraduate, graduate, and vocational students—and their parents—and it doesn’t charge any fees. But private student loans offered by this lender do have some significant drawbacks to consider. Here’s what you need to know. 
 As of July 1, 2020, Wells Fargo is no longer accepting private student loan applications from new customers. To qualify for a Wells Fargo loan, you must already have an outstanding balance on a Wells Fargo private student loan. 
Wells Fargo provides loans for undergraduate, graduate students, and parent borrowers. It also has loans for students in their residency, completing the bar exam, or pursuing career training or studying at community colleges. ﻿﻿
 
Depending on your dependency status, the most you can borrow each year in federal direct loans as an undergraduate student is between $5,500 and $12,500. If your tuition and room and board costs more than that, a private student loan from Wells Fargo can help cover the remaining amount. ﻿﻿
 
Wells Fargo’s undergraduate student loans have no origination, application, or late fees, and no prepayment penalties. You can borrow up to the total cost of attendance, minus the other financial aid you received. The limit Wells Fargo allows for all education debt—including federal student loans—is $120,000. ﻿﻿
 
If you are planning on getting a master’s degree, MBA, law degree, or other professional credential, a graduate school loan from Wells Fargo can be a cost-effective alternative to federal student loans. Depending on what federal loans you qualify for, your interest rate could be 6.08% to 7.08%. But if you have good credit, you could qualify for a loan with Wells Fargo with a fixed interest rate as low as 5.64%. ﻿﻿
 
Most graduate loans are subject to the same $120,000 cap as undergraduate loans. However, graduate loans used for law or business degrees have a lifetime limit of $180,000.﻿﻿
 
For graduate students in medical, nursing, dental, or other health-related programs, Wells Fargo offers MedCAP Medical School Loans. These loans give you a six-month grace period. But allopathic and osteopathic medical students can qualify for a 36-month grace period, giving them time to start their careers before they have to start making payments. ﻿﻿
 
The lifetime loan limit, combined with all other education debt, is dependent on your course of study: ﻿﻿
 
Medical residents who need help covering expenses related to their residency, medical boards, or relocation expenses may be eligible for Wells Fargo’s MedCAP-XTRA loans. There is a six-month grace period (36 months for allopathic and osteopathic students) and you can borrow up to $15,000 for qualifying expenses.﻿﻿ 
 (subject to lifetime loan limit) 
If you’re a law school student preparing to take the bar exam, you can use a Wells Fargo bar exam loan to pay for registration fees, test preparation materials, and your living expenses. You can borrow up to $12,000, and no payments are required until six months after you leave law school. ﻿﻿
 
If you are a parent of an undergraduate student, one option is to take out a federal Parent PLUS Loan. Be aware though that PLUS Loans have the highest interest rate of all federal loans—as of 2020, the interest rate is 7.08%. ﻿﻿
 
If you have good credit and are a Wells Fargo customer and can take advantage of its customer loyalty discounts, you could qualify for a lower interest rate with a Wells Fargo parent student loan. You can borrow up to $25,000 per year. Take note that deferring your payments until after graduation isn’t an option with Wells Fargo as repayment begins immediately. ﻿﻿
 
If you plan to attend a two-year school or a career training program rather than pursuing a bachelor’s degree, you may be eligible for a Wells Fargo loan for community colleges. With these loans, you can borrow up to $15,000 per year for a two-year public or private school, and $20,000 per year for a four-year proprietary school. These loans have a six-month grace period after you leave school.﻿﻿ 
 
To qualify for a private student loan from Wells Fargo, you must meet the following requirements: ﻿﻿
 
Wells Fargo does not offer loan prequalification. To figure out if you’re eligible for a loan and what interest rate you’d receive, you must submit your application and go through a hard credit inquiry, which can impact your credit score. 
 
Wells Fargo doesn’t charge origination or application fees and unlike most other private student loan lenders, it also doesn’t charge any late fees if you miss a payment. There are still consequences if you fall behind, such as damage to your credit report, but you won’t incur added fees. ﻿﻿
 
There is also no penalty if you choose to pay off your loan early, which is a smart way to save money on interest charges. 
 
You may be able to reduce your APR with one of the following discounts offered by Wells Fargo: ﻿﻿
 
With most Wells Fargo student loans, you have a six-month grace period, which means you don’t have to start making payments on your loans until six months after you graduate or leave school. Interest will accrue on your loans while you’re in college, but you aren’t required to make payments during this time. 
 
Wells Fargo loans for parents are the exception—the repayment period begins immediately for parent student loans. ﻿﻿
 
When it comes to rewards and benefits, borrowers are likely to be disappointed; Wells Fargo doesn’t offer any extra perks. That’s in stark contrast to other lenders like SoFi, which offer robust benefits, such as referral bonuses, career counseling, and member events. 
 
Wells Fargo doesn’t require applicants to have a co-signer. But if you don’t have excellent credit and steady income, you can improve your chances of qualifying for a loan and a competitive interest rate by adding a co-signer to your application. Plus, Wells Fargo allows borrowers to apply for co-signer releases after 24 months of on-time payments. ﻿﻿
 
Wells Fargo does have support programs in place for borrowers experiencing financial hardships. If you can’t find a job, get laid off, or have an unplanned medical expense, you could qualify for short-term payment relief for up to two months if you’re up-to-date with your payments. Or, you may be eligible for Wells Fargo’s loan modification program, where your monthly payment is temporarily or even permanently reduced to make it more affordable for you. To discuss your options, call 1-800-658-3567.﻿﻿
 
Loan discharge terms vary widely from lender to lender. With Wells Fargo, your loans will be discharged if the student borrower dies or becomes totally and permanently disabled. That’s the case even for parent student loans, which is a major advantage over Parent PLUS Loans. ﻿﻿
 
With PLUS Loans, the loans are only forgiven if the parent dies or becomes disabled, or if the student passes away. If the student is disabled, the parents still owe the full balance of the loan. 
 
Once you complete the online application and upload the necessary documentation, Wells Fargo will reach out to your selected school and ask it to certify the loan. Once certified, the bank will ask you (and your co-signer, if applicable) to sign a loan agreement. Once that’s complete, Wells Fargo will send the funds to your school’s financial aid office. According to the lender, borrowers should allow two to three weeks for the process to be completed. ﻿﻿
 
Wells Fargo offers student loan refinancing for both federal and private student loans. You can choose between fixed and variable-rate loans, and repayment terms range from five to 20 years in length.﻿﻿
 Wells Fargo has currently paused refinancing for federal student loans in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. This change is to allow federal loan borrowers to take advantage of benefits announced by the Department of Education, such as the ability to postpone payments for up to six months and interest waivers. Only those with private student loans are eligible for refinancing with Wells Fargo at this time.﻿﻿ 
Unfortunately, some borrowers have reported issues with Wells Fargo. In the 2019 Annual Report of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) Private Education Loan Ombudsman, the CFPB listed the number of complaints it received about private student loan companies. From Sept. 1, 2018 to Aug. 31, 2019, it handled 2,900 complaints about private student loan companies. Of those, 116—or about 5%—were about Wells Fargo. Most focused on issues dealing with the lender, while others were about problems affording monthly payments. ﻿﻿
 
You can reach customer support by calling 1-800-378-5526. Loan consultants are available Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. CST. Or, you can send a secure email through Wells Fargo’s website. 
 
If you’re a Wells Fargo customer, you could qualify for a private student loan with a lower interest rate than you could get with a federal loan. However, it’s still a good idea to complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid so you get all available financial aid options, including grants and federal student loans. If you decide that a private student loan from Wells Fargo is the right move, you can apply for a loan online. 
 
You’ll need to enter your school information, your Social Security number, permanent address, employment and income information, and the cost of attendance of your program and expected financial aid. ﻿﻿
 Because Wells Fargo has so few repayment options and charges relatively high interest rates, we recommend exploring other private student loan lenders. You can likely find another lender that offers more favorable repayment terms and lower rates than Wells Fargo, without its restrictions and borrowing limits. 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of student loan lenders. We collected over 45 data points across more than 15 lenders—including interest rates, fees, loan amounts, and repayment terms—to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their education needs.
 Well Fargo. “Private Student Loans.” Accessed April 2, 2020.   Well Fargo. “Undergraduate Private Student Loans.” Accessed April 2, 2020.   Federal Student Aid. “Student Loan Forgiveness.”Accessed April 2, 2020.   Federal Student Aid. “Understand How Interest is Calculated and What Fees are Associated with Your Federal Student Loan.”Accessed April 2, 2020.  Federal Student Aid. “Federal Student Loans for College or Career School are an Investment in Your Future.”Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Private Graduate Student Loans.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “MedCAP Medical School Loans.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Medical Residency and Relocation Loans.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Bar Exam Loan.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Parent Student Loans for College.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Private Loans for Career and Community Colleges.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Student Loan Interest Rate Discounts.” Accessed April 2, 2020.  Well Fargo. “Cosign a Private Student Loan.” Accessed April 2, 2020. 