
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Wells Fargo, founded in 1852, is one of the most recognizable banks in the United States. The bank offers a variety of financial services to consumers and businesses alike, including personal loans. Well-qualified applicants may be able to secure rates as low as 5.74% (with relationship discount) on personal loans ranging from $3,000–$100,000. The lender has secured and unsecured options for personal loans and charges limited fees. ﻿﻿
 
Our Wells Fargo personal loan review gives you the details you need to determine if the lender is a good fit for your financing needs.
 No origination fees or prepayment penalties for personal loans Attractive interest rates available for well qualified applicants  Customer relationship discount available Only existing Wells Fargo customers can apply online or over the phone Potentially lengthy application process if bank requests more documents Only a small percent of applicants qualify for the lowest rate 
Wells Fargo is offering fee waivers, payment deferrals, and other expanded assistance for personal loan borrowers on a case-by-case basis. All borrowers can defer monthly payments for three consecutive billing cycles.﻿﻿
 
As one of the biggest banks in the country, it’s no surprise that Wells Fargo offers a wide variety of personal loan products—both secured and unsecured. You can use personal loans from the lender to consolidate debt, finance home improvement projects, or pay for major purchases or expenses. ﻿﻿
 
Wells Fargo gives borrowers a lot of flexibility when it comes to how they use the funds they borrow. However, the lender won’t allow you to use personal loans to cover any education-related costs. 
 
Another perk that comes with borrowing money from Wells Fargo is the possibility of receiving your loan funds as soon as the next business day. But if the lender requests additional documentation when it reviews your application, the loan process might be drawn out.﻿﻿ 
 
There are several other personal loan features to consider:
 
There are three ways to apply for a personal loan from Wells Fargo—online, over the phone, or in person. If you don’t already have an existing account with the bank, you will need to visit a Wells Fargo branch in person to apply. It’s wise to schedule an appointment in advance if you plan to fill out an application with a banker. 
 
Before you begin, gather the following information to complete your application:﻿﻿
 
Additionally, the lender may ask you for documents to verify the information on your application. Verification documents may include recent pay stubs, W-2s, tax returns, utility bills, driver’s license, Social Security card, payoff information for current debts, and more. 
 
If you’re applying for a loan online, you should receive a response to your application quickly. There is even a chance your loan could be funded as soon as the next business day. 
 
But if the bank requires additional documentation from you or wants to verify your employment and income, the process may take longer. You might also need to complete the loan closing at a physical bank branch. Depending upon how you apply, you may be able to track your application online using the Wells Fargo yourLoanTracker. 
 
Wells Fargo does allow qualified applicants to refinance certain loans with new Wells Fargo personal loans. Yet it’s unclear whether the bank will let you refinance one of its own loan products or strictly loans that were initially issued by other lenders. ﻿﻿
 It’s wise to do your homework before you apply for a personal loan from any lender, Wells Fargo included. First, you should determine if a personal loan is a good financial move. A personal loan might be useful if you can consolidate high-interest debts or to cover large expenses you can’t afford to pay out of pocket. But make sure that a new loan won’t strain your budget and that you won’t use the funds to support an overspending habit before you apply.  If you’re confident that a personal loan is the right financial move for you, a Wells Fargo loan is certainly worth considering. Its low interest rates and limited fees make it an attractive option. However, you should still compare offers from several personal loan lenders upfront, especially if you don't think you can meet Wells Fargo's minmum score requirements. Comparing loan offers can help you find the best deal available for your specific needs.  
Investopedia is dedicated to providing consumers with unbiased, comprehensive reviews of personal loan lenders. We collected over 25 data points across more than 50 lenders including interest rates, fees, loan amounts and repayment terms to ensure that our content helps users make the right borrowing decision for their needs.
 Well Fargo. “Personal Loans.” Accessed May 18, 2020.