
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Founded in 1852 in the midst of the California gold rush, Wells Fargo has been a major player in American finance for nearly 170 years and ranks as the fourth-largest bank in the country. Plagued by several high-profile scandals in the mid-2010s, the bank has been working to rehabilitate its image and regain trust by focusing on customer service and technological innovations.
 Highly accessible — numerous locations Frequently waived monthly fees Innovative, secure data-sharing, and money management apps Low interest rates Overdraft fees levied up to three times daily History of costly scandals 
Wells Fargo will appeal to customers who want a well-established traditional bank with a large geographic footprint. It will be a great fit for those who:
 
Wells Fargo has a full array of the usual financial products and services for their customers. These include:
 
Created specifically to encourage savings, the Wells Fargo Way2Save Savings Account has a low minimum deposit of $25, and a monthly service fee of $5, which can be waived with either a $300 minimum daily balance or by setting up a recurring, automatic savings option. In addition, Wells Fargo automatically waives the monthly fee for account holders under the age of 18.
 
Another savings encouragement is the Save As You Go Transfer, which moves $1 from your Wells Fargo checking account to your Way2Save account with each qualifying transaction. These transactions include any non-recurring debit card purchases and any time you pay a bill using the Wells Fargo online bill pay option.
 
Wells Fargo also touts the use of your Way2Save account as a method of overdraft protection for customers who also have checking accounts. If you sign up for this optional service, Wells Fargo will transfer money from your Way2Save account into your checking account to cover an overdraft. However, this service doesn't prevent you from being charged $35 per overdraft, up to a maximum of three overdrafts per business day.
 
The APY on Way2Save accounts is currently set at 0.01%, and there is no minimum balance required to earn.
 
Wells Fargo considers Platinum Savings to be a savings account, although it shares some characteristics with a money market account. Specifically, Platinum Savings comes with the ability to write checks; but as with a money market account, withdrawals (whether directly or by written check) are limited to six per month.
 
Savers can expect an APY of 0.03% with Platinum Savings, but there is a relationship bonus APY of 0.06% if you also maintain either a Prime Checking ( or Portfolio by Wells Fargo account (see below). Close the qualifying checking account, and you lose the bonus rate.
 
Customers can open a Platinum Savings account with only $25, and there is no minimum balance requirement to earn interest. However, there is a $12 monthly fee that can only be waived by maintaining a $3,500 minimum daily balance.
 
Everyday Checking is Wells Fargo's basic checking account option, the one that will appeal to the majority of customers. You can open an account with $25, but expect to pay a $10 monthly fee unless you meet one of the following waiver requirements:
 
While it is relatively easy to avoid the monthly fee, make sure you're aware of the other charges you may face, including a $2.50 out-of-network ATM fee and a $35 overdraft fee if you overdraw your account. If you sign up for Overdraft Protection with a linked savings account, you can avoid the painful $35 fee, but you will still have to pony up a $12.50 transfer fee when the money moves from savings to checking.
 All checking account holders have the opportunity to reverse overdrafts with the Overdraft Rewind. Here's how it works: if you make an ACH deposit that covers the overdraft by 9:00 a.m., Wells Fargo will recalculate your balance to include the ACH deposit and may reverse any overdrafts or returned items that would have otherwise resulted without the addition of the deposit. 
Preferred Checking represents the lowest tier of the bank's interest-bearing checking accounts. To earn the 0.01% APY offered by this account, you need a minimum balance of $500.
 
You can open a Preferred Checking account with just $25, although it does carry a $15 per month maintenance fee. As with other Wells Fargo accounts, there are several waiver options though. These include:
 
In addition to earning interest, Preferred Checking also offers several perks that differentiate it from the Everyday Checking account:
 
As with the Everyday Checking account, expect to pay $35 per overdraft if you happen to overdraw your account. If you have a linked savings account and have opted for Overdraft Protection, the transfer fee for this service is $12.50 anytime an automatic transfer is triggered by an overdraft.
 
As the bank's premium checking account, Portfolio by Wells Fargo offers customers a number of major perks, particularly if you have several linked accounts. At its core, the Portfolio account is an interest-bearing checking account, although the 0.01% APY is not currently impressive. Expect a $30 per month maintenance fee, unless you meet one of the waiver qualifications:
 
There are additional perks available to Portfolio account holders that can potentially make up for the low APY. Specifically, account holders also enjoy the following:
 
Account-holders who keep a qualifying balance of more than $250,000 also shave fees waived on incoming wires, stop payments, and overdraft protection transfers, as well as unlimited reimbursement of out-of-network ATM fees within the U.S.
 
Finally, Portfolio customers are also granted access to Wells Fargo advisors for investment guidance, as well as discounts on the Wells Fargo Intuitive Investor account and the WellsTrade Online and Mobile Brokerage.
 
Young people looking for an opportunity to manage their own money might consider Wells Fargo Teen Checking. it's available for minors aged 13 to 17, with an adult co-owner.
 
Like the other checking accounts on this list, Teen Checking comes with a debit card that the account-holder may use for spending and ATM withdrawals. However, in this case, parents can both monitor account activity and set limits on purchases and withdrawals.
 
The account can be opened with a $25 minimum deposit, and there is no monthly fee. Wells Fargo has also reduced the overdraft fee for this account to $15, and will only impose it two times per business day, rather than the three times-per-day limit on the Everyday Checking account. The Overdraft Protection account transfer fee remains the same at $12.50 per item.
 
The Wells Fargo Opportunity Checking account is geared towards consumers who are unable to qualify for a standard checking account because of their credit or banking history. Customers cannot apply directly for this account, but they may be offered it as an option if they are unable to qualify for a standard checking account.
 
You can open an Opportunity Checking account with as little as $25, and there is a $10 per month maintenance fee. This fee is waived if you meet one of the following qualifications:
 
As with the other checking accounts, expect to pay a $2.50 fee on out-of-network ATMs and $35 for overdrafts. You can opt for Overdraft Protection with Opportunity Checking; if you do, the fee for an automatic transfer to cover your overdraft is $12.50.
 
Wells Fargo offers several different CD products, and there are some bonus APY offers for Portfolio by Wells Fargo account-holders. The CDs come in two flavors: Step Rate CDs and Fixed Rate CDs.
 
The Step Rate CD is a 24-month product that offers one guaranteed interest-rate increase and one penalty-free withdrawal every six months. There are two interest-rate tiers: the basic rate offered, and the bonus rate that is only available to Portfolio account-holders.
 
The Fixed Rate CD offers several terms, including a Special CD with a five-month term and a minimum opening deposit of $5,000.
 
Wells Fargo offers credit cards that can meet nearly any banking or credit need, from cash-back cards to rewards cards to cards that are well-suited to balance transfers. Here are some of the cards that Wells Fargo offers:
 
Cash-back Credit Cards
 
Rewards Cards
 
Cards for Balance Transfers
 
In addition to deposit accounts and credit cards, Wells Fargo also offers the following products and services to its customers:
 
Customers can reach Wells Fargo customer service agents in a variety of ways, including:
 
Wells Fargo also offers a highly rated mobile app that allows you to conduct your banking business on the go. The app is currently has a rating of 4.8 out of 5 stars on the App Store and 4.7 out of 5 on Google Play.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 Beginning in 2016, a seemingly endless series of scandals has beset Wells Fargo: the creation of phony deposit and credit card accounts, the unauthorized purchase of insurance policies for clients, improper auto-loan, and mortgage practices, the alteration of customer data—practices dating back at least 14 years, and only admitted to after investigations by journalists and regulators. Wells Fargo has paid billions in government fines, criminal and civil lawsuit settlements, and restitution to injured parties. Nevertheless, it seems likely that the revelations of the bank's malfeasance continue to tarnish its image in a skeptical public's eyes. According to the 2020 J.D. Power and Associates Retail Banking and Satisfaction Study, Wells Fargo ranks below the average satisfaction level in every region except New England.﻿﻿﻿ 
Potential customers can open a new Wells Fargo account online or in a bank branch, although many branches are currently closed in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. However, applying for an account online provides an instant application status response.
 
Once you are set up with a Wells Fargo account, you can take care of your banking needs online and with the mobile app.
 Customers looking for a well-established and well-rounded financial institution may do well with Wells Fargo. Not only does this bank possess a large geographic footprint, but it also has every type of account, product, and service you may need—a true one-stop banking shop. Add in the fact that you can enjoy some relationship bonuses for linking multiple accounts or products under the Wells Fargo umbrella, and this institution is a clear winner for anyone who values efficiency and streamlined banking experience. That said, Wells Fargo has not yet earned back the public's trust after the revelations from 2016 to 2018, of a series of systemic fraudulent practices that victimized its own clients for nearly two decades. While the bank is working to correct its course—in February 2020, it agreed to pay $3 billion in fines to settle a civil lawsuit and resolve a Justice Department criminal prosecution—consumers might understandably like to wait and see if any more ugly shoes drop before trusting their money to this institution.﻿﻿ Unless Wells Fargo can offer more tempting interest rates or find other ways to distinguish its products, its dented reputation—coupled with lackluster rates—makes it a less-enticing option for anyone who is not looking specifically for convenience.