
On February 20, 2018, the Departments of Health and Human Services (HHS), Labor and the Treasury released a proposed rule that would increase the length of coverage for short-term health insurance plans from three months to 364 days. They proposed this rule in response to an executive order President Trump issued in October 2017 telling these departments to propose regulations or guidance that would make this type of insurance more available in order to encourage consumer choice and provider competition in the health insurance market.
 
“For Americans who have been priced out of Obamacare plans, who can't find a plan that will cover their doctor, or who are looking for affordable coverage between jobs, these short-term plans could make a lot of sense,” wrote Alex Azar, U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, in a February 23 op-ed published by CNN.
 
In October 2016, the Obama administration capped the duration of these plans at three months because of concerns that the plans were allowing people to skirt the healthcare law and keeping healthier people off the exchanges created under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Trump administration wants to remove the three-month cap in order to expand insurance options for individuals who don’t have health insurance through an employer or through the exchanges. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, insurers have already found a way around the three-month limit by offering four-packs of three-month plans that only require the applicant to qualify once.
 
The proposed rule is now in a comment period that ends April 23. During this period, anyone can express their opinions about the proposal. The government will then review the comments and decide whether to enact the rule into law as is or make changes. Unlike bills that must be passed by both the House and the Senate and then be approved by the president in order to become law, agency rules easily become law after the public comment period ends. Thus, we can expect some version of this rule to become law in the next few months.
 
By increasing the maximum length of a short-term policy from three months to 364 days, people who might otherwise be uninsured may be able to purchase short-term coverage instead. These people include:
 
In more than half of U.S. counties, according to HHS, only a single insurer participates in the ACA market. Many insurers have left certain markets because of large financial losses. In Alaska, Iowa, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Wyoming and several other states, the entire state has only a single insurer through the exchange.
 
The HHS fact sheet on the proposed rule says that in the fourth quarter of 2016, a short-term, limited duration policy cost about $124 a month, while an ACA-compliant plan cost $393 a month without subsidies, a difference of $269 per month, or $3,228 per year. A Kaiser Family Foundation analysis found even bigger differences when obtaining quotes for a 40-year-old male in some cities. The least expensive short-term plan in Chicago, for example, costs just $55 per month (the most expensive, however, costs $573) while the least expensive bronze marketplace plan, without subsidies, costs $305, a difference of $250 per month. (For another premium-cutting option see How High-Deductible Health Plans Work)
 
Short-term, limited-duration health insurance works the way all non-employer-based health insurance worked before the Affordable Care Act. Here are its potential downsides:
 
Short-term policies can offer more choices and considerable savings to individuals who are healthy and stay healthy. They do so at a cost to individuals who carry ACA-compliant policies.
 
Marketplace policyholders can expect to pay higher premiums as short-term policies siphon healthy people away from the exchanges. They can also expect to see more insurers leave the ACA marketplace as it becomes increasingly expensive to cover less-healthy individuals who can only get insured through the marketplace.
