
The estimated average Social Security disability benefit amount for a disabled worker receiving Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) is $1,259 per month as of June 30, 2020.﻿﻿ These benefits are based on average lifetime earnings, not on household income or how severe the individual's disability is.﻿﻿
 
If you've kept your annual Social Security statement, you can find what you are likely to receive in the Estimated Benefits section. The total amount a disabled worker and their family can receive is about 150% to 180% of the disabled worker's benefit. Eligible family members can include a spouse, divorced spouse, child, a disabled child, and/or an adult child disabled before age 22.﻿﻿
 
Social Security disability benefits come from payroll deductions required by the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) to cover the cost of Social Security benefits such as retirement, as well as spousal and survivors' benefits.﻿﻿ Some of this funding goes into the Disability Insurance Trust Fund and pays for disability benefits.﻿﻿
 
According to the Social Security website, to qualify for Social Security disability benefits, you must have worked a certain length of time in jobs covered by Social Security. Generally, you need 40 credits, 20 of which were earned in the last 10 years, ending with the year you became disabled. You must also have a medical condition that meets Social Security's definition of disability.﻿﻿
 
Social Security Disability Insurance should not be confused with Supplemental Security Income (SSI), which pays benefits to those who have financial needs regardless of their work history. These two names sound similar, but the qualifications to get the payments and what you might receive are very different.﻿﻿
 
While there are some conditions the Social Security Administration (SSA) considers so severe they automatically render an applicant disabled, many conditions require careful screening, including answering these five questions:
 
In addition, qualifying conditions must be expected to last at least one year or result in death.﻿﻿
 
Many people believe you have to be disabled for a certain period of time before you can apply for Social Security disability benefits. That isn't true. You can (and should) apply as soon as you believe you are disabled. There is a mandatory waiting period, and you will receive benefits after your sixth full month of disability.﻿﻿ Once you start getting them, whether or not they are taxable depends on your income.﻿﻿
 
You should apply for Social Security disability benefits as soon as you become disabled. The application process can take three to five months, according to Social Security, ﻿﻿﻿and counts as part of the mandatory waiting period of five months after the onset of your disability.
 
You can apply at the Social Security website or by calling 1-800-772-1213.﻿﻿ Social Security has an online calculator you can use to obtain an estimate of both retirement and disability benefits for you and your family members.
 Social Security Administration. "Fact Sheet on the Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance Program." Accessed Oct. 20, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner: Disability - You're Approved." Accessed April 29, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner: Family Benefits." Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "What Is FICA?," Pages 1-2. Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Disability Insurance Trust Fund." Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner: Disability - How You Qualify." Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Benefits." Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "2021 SOCIAL SECURITY CHANGES." Accessed Oct. 20, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner: Disability - You're Approved." Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Benefits Planner - Income Taxes And Your Social Security Benefit." Accessed Feb. 22, 2020. Social Security Administration. "What You Should Know Before You Apply for Social Security Disability Benefits," Page 2. Accessed April 29, 2020. Social Security Administration. "Disability Benefits." Accessed April 29, 2020.