
If you are covered by Medicare and are wondering whether you really need a Medicare Supplementary Insurance policy, also known as Medigap, you’re not alone. The Medicare website contains hundreds of pages of information, few of which are easy reading. It’s hard to get an answer to the big question: Why should anyone who has Medicare get a Medigap plan? Below is our answer.
 
Medigap is a supplement to Medicare coverage. Depending on the type of coverage, Medigap policies are designed to provide more coverage for routine services Medicare does cover and, in some cases, all or part of the expenses Medicare does not cover—such as long-term care, vision, or dental coverage.
 
The purpose of a Medigap plan is to be reimbursed for the costs you pay directly out of your own pocket. As is the case with any health insurance plan, you will pay a higher price for higher coverage. And a less expensive plan will have a higher deductible.
 
About 81% of current Medicare recipients have some sort of additional coverage through an employer or the government if not through a Medigap plan, according to the most recent data available from the Kaiser Family Foundation.﻿﻿ These plans are offered by private insurance companies, so you'll have to do some comparison shopping to get the one that fits your needs and financial situation. Keep in mind that lettered plans from each company have the same benefits.
 
As noted above, Medicare isn't a blanket insurance policy. This means it does have holes in it. Original Medicare, as the government calls what we now know as Parts A and B—and Medicare prescription drug coverage, part D— pays most of your expenses. But it's far from all of the costs you may face if you become seriously ill or get injured. Even routine services come with co-payments and deductibles. This is where Medigap insurance kicks in.
 
Here are a few examples. If you are admitted to the hospital, you have 100% hospitalization coverage after the $1,408 annual deductible under Original Medicare Part A, as of 2020. That’s the basic bed and board. However, you may owe up to 20% of some other costs, such as anesthesiologist fees.
 
If you are in the hospital for more than 60 days, you have to pay $352 per day. There are similar copayments for long stays in nursing facilities and hospices. Regular doctor visits and outpatient medical care may cost you too. Your deductible is $198, but after that, you’ll pay up to 20% of the Medicare-approved amount for most doctor services. There’s no upper limit.﻿﻿
 
Prescription drugs can also eat into your budget if you need expensive medications. You should know that you can purchase standalone prescription coverage. That’s Part D in Medicare terminology.
 
Under the Affordable Care Act, the prescription price donut hole has been closing each year, but it’s not completely gone yet. At a certain level—$4,020 in 2020—you enter the notorious donut hole in coverage that requires you to pay up to 25% of covered brand-name drug costs or 37% for generic drugs. When costs go above $5,100 for the year, you pass through the donut hole and owe only 5% of the cost of drugs.﻿﻿
 
You may already know that Medicare Parts A and B comprise basic coverage, while Part D is an optional prescription drug plan you can buy from a private provider and attach to your Medicare. Part C, also known as Medicare Advantage, replaces all of the basic government coverage with a private insurance plan; if you choose Part C, you do not need a Medigap Plan.
 
But if you go for original Medicare, plus Part D—and do want a Medigap plan for more complete coverage—there are more letters to learn. Each letter represents a standard level of coverage. For Medigap plans, the most popular choices are F and G.
 
This is the most comprehensive plan and has been the most popular choice for years. The average Plan F cost was $169.14 per month as of 2018. As of January 1, 2020, however, Plan F will no longer be available to people newly eligible for Medicare. People with Plan F will be able to keep it, and people who were eligible for Medicare before 2020 but didn’t have a Medigap plan will still be allowed to get Plan F if they wish.﻿﻿
 
This plan will likely replace Plan F in popularity, as it has virtually the same coverage except for reimbursement of the Part B deductible—a perk that will no longer be included in any plans offered to Medicare newbies starting in 2020. The average Plan G should be about $180 per year cheaper than Plan F. However, costs vary widely according to the applicant’s zip code, gender, and tobacco use. They also increase with age.﻿﻿
 Medigap Plan G has almost the same coverage as the popular Plan F—which is being retired as of January 1, 2020, for anyone newly eligible for Medicare—lacking only the reimbursement of the Plan B deductible. 
Here’s the short answer: If you want 100% coverage of everything, an F or G plan (depending on your eligibility) is your choice. The other plans offer progressively less coverage for less cost upfront.
 
For a more detailed answer, you can do one of the following:
 
A Medicare Advantage Plan, or Part C under Medicare, is a private replacement for the public Medicare program. These plans are set up as health maintenance organizations (HMOs) that replace all of the services of Original Medicare and add additional services,such as preventive healthcare, within a preselected network of doctors and hospitals.
 
A Medigap policy is a supplement to your Original Medicare coverage that pays expenses that Original Medicare doesn’t cover. It will probably give you more freedom of choice than Medicare Advantage, provided your physician or facility accepts Medicare. It is a better option for snowbirds and others who travel a great deal or have homes in more than one location.
 
You can’t have Medigap and a Medicare Advantage Plan at the same time.﻿﻿ In many cases, having both means you’d be paying for duplicate coverage. An insurer will sell you a Medigap policy if you’re leaving Medicare Advantage. This allows you to start your Medigap coverage the day after your Advantage plan runs out.
 
No. A Medigap policy covers only one person and doesn't cover expenses incurred by your spouse. Medicare isn't like an employer-sponsored plan; you can't enroll your spouse under your coverage. This means you and your spouse have to purchase separate plans to be covered for supplemental insurance.﻿﻿
 
No, that’s illegal. As long as you pay your premiums, your policy is renewable for the rest of your life. You can only be dropped if any of the following apply:
 
If you choose to cancel your Medigap policy, you must do so by contacting the insurance company directly.
 
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law a $2 trillion coronavirus emergency stimulus package called the CARES (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security) Act. It expands Medicare's ability to cover treatment and services for those affected by COVID-19. The CARES Act also:
 
For Medicaid, the CARES Act clarifies that non-expansion states can use the Medicaid program to cover COVID-19-related services for uninsured adults who would have qualified for Medicaid if the state had chosen to expand. Other populations with limited Medicaid coverage are also eligible for coverage under this state option.﻿﻿
 KFF.org. "Sources of Supplemental Coverage Among Medicare Beneficiaries in 2016." Accessed May 2, 2020. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. "2020 Medicare Parts A & B Premiums and Deductibles." Accessed May 2, 2020. Medicare.gov. "Costs in the Coverage Gap." Accessed May 2, 2020. Medicare Advantage. "How Much Is the Average Cost for Medicare Supplement Plan F?" Accessed May 2, 2020. BCBS. "What Do I Need to Know About Medicare Supplement Plans C, F and G?" Accessed May 2, 2020. Medicare. "What's Medicare Supplement Insurance (Medigap)?" Accessed May 2, 2020. U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services. "CARES Act Provider Relief Fund." Accessed May 2, 2020.