
Credit reports have a way of hanging over borrowers like a black cloud after they’ve overextended themselves or made late payments. Suddenly, getting another loan or credit line becomes a lot tougher—and more expensive.
 
What many consumers don’t realize is that banks have access to a similar database for checking accounts. More often than not, they get your information from a company called ChexSystems, which keeps negative reports on file for five years. If you’ve written enough bounced checks or left overdraft fees unpaid within that time frame, opening an account at another bank can be a challenge.
 • Banks that offer "second chance" checking accounts either don't use reports from ChexSystems or weigh past mistakes less. • Few national banks offer accounts for customers with poor credit, although some credit unions and regional banks do. • Most second chance accounts have monthly maintenance fees, although they're sometimes reduced for customers who set up a direct deposit or maintain certain account balances. 
Banks do offer a lifeline for people in this tough spot: so-called “second chance” checking accounts. Providers don’t use your ChexSystems file or credit report—another risk-assessment tool used by some banks—to weed out customers with a spotty history.
 
Many of these products have certain restrictions, like the inability to set up overdraft protection—a feature that got a lot of customers blacklisted in the first place. And you’ll likely have to pay a monthly fee unless you maintain a minimum balance or set up direct deposits into your account. However, those are becoming standard at a lot of banks anyway.
 
Once you get past the name, most of these accounts start to look pretty similar to standard checking accounts. Many offer online banking capabilities and provide you with a debit card. And once you’ve used your account responsibly for a certain period of time—sometimes as little as 12 months—some banks allow you to upgrade to a regular account.
 
Most major banks don’t offer checking accounts for bad credit, which makes Wells Fargo’s Opportunity Checking account the exception. You’ll have to pay a $10 monthly fee unless you meet the criteria to have it waived, but you do get access to handy features such as mobile banking and a debit card.
 
You can also go to some online banks like Chime and Radius Bank, which offer specialty products geared toward customers with a less-than-perfect banking history.
 
A number of regional banks and credit unions also have accounts for customers with a blemished ChexSystems report, though the fact that they go by a variety of names sometimes makes them harder to spot. Here are a few examples:
 
Another good way to find an account close to home: Hop on the website of Bank On, a program that helps connect consumers with low-cost bank and credit union accounts. You can click on the “Coalitions & Accounts” tab to find approved products in your state.
 
If your main reason for getting a checking account is the ability to make online payments and other cash-free transactions, a prepaid debit card might fit your needs just as well as a checking account.
 Prepaid cards typically charge a monthly fee, although it's usually smaller than that of a second chance checking account. 
Many prepaid cards, like the Wells Fargo EasyPay Card ($5 monthly fee), allow you to reload the card as often as you like at no additional cost. Plus, you can use the card to withdraw cash from a network of 13,000 Wells Fargo-owned ATMs around the country and either direct-deposit your paychecks or deposit checks using the mobile app.﻿﻿
 
The U.S. Bank Safe Debit Account, which also costs $4.95 a month, offers a similar range of benefits. In addition to providing a Visa debit card with online banking and bill pay, customers get access to their VantageScore credit ranking and discounted money orders. As long as check-writing isn’t a must-have feature, it’s a compelling alternative.﻿﻿
 
Don’t fret if you’ve made a few banking mistakes in the past and need a new checking account. A number of national and regional banks market products that ignore your past mistakes. Will you pay a monthly fee? Perhaps. But many will let you upgrade within a year, ensuring that the pain is only temporary.
 Wells Fargo. "Wells Fargo Opportunity Checking." Accessed March 3, 2020. Chime. "Chime Second Chance Checking." Accessed March 3, 2020. Radius Bank. "Essential Checking." Accessed March 3, 2020. Radius Bank. Phone call with customer service. Accessed Apr. 22, 2020. Axiom Bank. "Checking Accounts." Accessed March 3, 2020. BancorpSouth. "Second Chance Checking Account." Accessed March 3, 2020. BBVA. "Press Release." Accessed Apr. 22, 2020. BBVA. "BBVA Easy Checking." Accessed March 3, 2020. OUB. "Locations." Accessed Apr. 22, 2020. OneUnited Bank. "U2 Membership." Accessed March 3, 2020. United Bank. "Personal Checking." Accessed March 3, 2020. United Bank. Phone call with customer service. Accessed Apr. 22, 2020. Woodforest. "About Us." Accessed Apr. 22, 2020. Woodforest National Bank. "Checking Accounts." Accessed March 3, 2020. Wells Fargo. "Wells Fargo EasyPay Card." Accessed March 3, 2020. U.S. Bank. "Safe Debit Account." Accessed March 3, 2020.