
The Norwegian krone (NOK) is the official currency of Norway with its regulation and circulation controlled by the country's central bank, the Norges Bank. The bank issued a total of eight series of banknotes, including the October 2018, issued of a new 50-krone and 500-krone bills. Consumers may still use the 50-krone and 500-krone banknotes from the previous series until 18 October 2019.
 
The Norwegian krone, or kroner for the plural term, subdivides into 100 øre. The word krone translates into English as the crown. Coins come in denominations of 1, 5, 10, and 20 krone and banknotes appear as in denominations of 50, 100, 200, 500, and 1,000 kroner. The currency code for NOK is “ISK,” and the currency symbol is “kr.”
 The year 5 kroner coins were introduced. 
Banknotes feature prominent Norwegians such as noted scientists and artists on the front of the currency, along with information indicating the specific person’s contribution to Norwegian culture. The back of each bill depicts some aspect of Norwegian art. For example, the 50-krone note contains a green tint, a portrait of Peter Christen Asbjørnsen on the front and an artist’s rendering of Asbjørnsen’s story A Summer Night in Krogskogen.
 Production of 1 and 2 øre coins ceased in 1972, and silver was replaced by cupro-nickel in 1920. 
The first circulation of the krone came in 1875 when it became the replacement of the speciedaler. At this time, the conversion rate was four kroner for one speciedaler. Following the switch, Norway joined the Scandinavian Monetary Union, an alliance which existed until the outbreak of World War I. During the existence of the Union, the Norwegian krone acted as the gold standard with one kilogram of gold equivalent to 2,480 kroner. Use of the NOK as a gold standard ended in 1931.
 
In 1939 the country's currency pegged to the U.S. dollar (USD), but while occupied by Germany during the Second World War, it pegged to the Reichsmark. At the war's end, the currency pegged to the British pound (GBP). In 1992, the central bank moved away from a fixed exchange rate, allowing the currency to float based on the foreign currency exchange rate.
 The 10 Syrian pound so closely resembles the 20 Norwegian kroner that it can fool many coin-operated, automated service machines in the country. 
As with all currencies, economic trends trigger fluctuation in the value of the Norwegian krone. Currency investors may seek out the NOK when the euro’s (EUR) value is in doubt. Increased activity in trading the NOK may increase the rate of exchange. Changes in the global price of crude oil also affect the NOK's value as Norway is Western Europe’s leading oil exporter.
 
Norway's shipping, hydroelectric power, fishing and manufacturing all contribute to the country's gross domestic product (GDP). However, it is interesting to note many industries are state-owned. Historically, the krone is a prudent investment as, Norway stakes claim to one of Europe’s most stable economies.
 
Norway is one of the wealthiest countries on the globe and enjoys one of the highest standards of living. According to the 2017 World Bank data, Norway has a high-income economy with slow population growth at 0.9% annually. The yearly gross domestic product growth per year is at 1.9% while the inflation deflator is at 3.8% yearly.
