
A nonperforming loan (NPL) is a loan in which the borrower is in default due to the fact that they have not made the scheduled payments for a specified period. Although the exact elements of nonperforming status can vary depending on the specific loan's terms, "no payment" is usually defined as zero payments of either principal or interest. The specified period also varies, depending on the industry and the type of loan. Generally, however, the period is 90 days or 180 days.
 
A nonperforming loan (NPL) is considered in default or close to default. Once a loan is nonperforming, the odds the debtor will repay it in full are substantially lower. If the debtor resumes payments again on an NPL, it becomes a reperforming loan, even if the debtor has not caught up on all the missed payments.
 
In banking, commercial loans are considered nonperforming if the debtor has made zero payments of interest or principal within 90 days, or is 90 days past due. For a consumer loan, 180 days past due classifies it as an NPL.
 
A loan is in arrears when principal or interest payments are late or missed. A loan is in default when the lender considers the loan agreement to be broken and the debtor is unable to meet his obligations.
 
A debt can achieve "nonperforming loan" status in several ways. Examples of NPLs include:
 
Several international financial authorities offer specific guidelines for determining nonperforming loans.
 
The European Central Bank (ECB) requires asset and definition comparability to evaluate risk exposures across euro area central banks. The ECB specifies multiple criteria that can cause an NPL classification when it performs stress tests on participating banks.
 
The ECB has performed a comprehensive assessment and developed criteria to define loans as nonperforming if they are:
 
An addendum, issued in 2018, specified the time frame for lenders to set aside funds to cover nonperforming loans: two to seven years, depending on whether the loan was secured or not. As of 2020, eurozone lenders still have approximately $1 trillion worth of nonperforming loans on their books.
 A nonperforming loan (NPL) is one in which payments of either interest or principal have not been made for a set number of days, for whatever reason. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also sets out multiple criteria for a nonperforming loan classification.
 
The IMF has defined nonperforming loans as those whose:[cite]
