
Long/short equity is an investing strategy that takes long positions in stocks that are expected to appreciate and short positions in stocks that are expected to decline. A long/short equity strategy seeks to minimize market exposure while profiting from stock gains in the long positions, along with price declines in the short positions. Although this may not always be the case, the strategy should be profitable on a net basis.
 
The long/short equity strategy is popular with hedge funds, many of which employ a market-neutral strategy, in which dollar amounts of both long and short positions are equal.
 
Long/short equity works by exploiting profit opportunities in both potential upside and downside expected price moves. This strategy identifies and takes long positions in stocks identified as being relatively underpriced while selling short stocks that are deemed to be overpriced.
 
While many hedge funds also employ a long/short equity strategy with a long bias (such as 130/30, where long exposure is 130% and short exposure is 30%), comparatively fewer hedge funds employ a short bias to their long/short strategy. It is historically more difficult to uncover profitable short ideas than long ideas.
 
Long/short equity strategies can be differentiated from one another in a number of ways—by market geography (advanced economies, emerging markets, Europe, etc.), sector (energy, technology, etc.), investment philosophy (value or growth), and so on.
 
An example of a long/short equity strategy with a broad mandate would be a global equity growth fund, while an example of a relatively narrow mandate would be an emerging markets healthcare fund.
 
A long/short equity fund differs from an equity market neutral (EMN) fund in that the latter attempts to exploit differences in stock prices by being long and short in closely related stocks that have similar characteristics.
 
An EMN strategy attempts to keep the total value of their long and short holdings roughly equal, as this helps to lower the overall risk. To maintain this equivalency between long and short, equity market neutral funds must rebalance as market trends establish and strengthen.
 
So as other long/short hedge funds let profits run on market trends and even leverage up to amplify them, equity market neutral funds are actively staunching returns and increasing the size of the opposite position. When the market inevitably turns again, equity market neutral funds again whittle down the position that should profit to move more into the portfolio that is suffering.
 
A hedge fund with an equity market neutral strategy is generally aiming itself at institutional investors who are shopping for a hedge fund that can outperform bonds without carrying the high risk and high reward profile of more aggressive funds.
 
A popular variation of the long/short model is that of the “pair trade," which involves offsetting a long position on a stock with a short position on another stock in the same sector.
 
For example, an investor in the technology space may take a long position in Microsoft and offset that with a short position in Intel. If the investor buys 1,000 shares of Microsoft at $33 each, and Intel is trading at $22, the short leg of this paired trade would involve purchasing 1,500 Intel shares so that the dollar amounts of the long and short positions are equal.
 
The ideal situation for this long/short strategy would be for Microsoft to appreciate and for Intel to decline. If Microsoft rises to $35 and Intel falls to $21, the overall profit on this strategy would be $3,500. Even if Intel advances to $23—since the same factors typically drive stocks up or down in a specific sector—the strategy would still be profitable at $500, although much less so.
 
To get around the fact that stocks within a sector generally tend to move up or down in unison, long/short strategies frequently tend to use different sectors for the long and short legs. For example, if interest rates are rising, a hedge fund may short interest-sensitive sectors such as utilities, and go long on defensive sectors, such as health care.

A long/short fund is a type of mutual fund or hedge fund that takes both long and short positions in investments typically from a specific market segment. These funds often use several alternative investing techniques such as leverage, derivatives and short positions to purchases relatively undervalued securities and sell overvalued ones.
 
Long/short funds may also be referred to as enhanced funds or 130/30 funds.
 
Long/short funds typically seek to enhance the returns from investing in a specific market segment by actively taking both long and short positions in securities. Long/short funds use varying active management techniques to determine portfolio holdings. They may also use leverage, derivatives and short positions which can increase the risks of the fund as well as the fund’s potential total return.
 
Long/short funds represent some similarities to hedge funds. They seek to offer investment strategies with greater risk and greater return potential over standard benchmarks. Most long/short funds feature higher liquidity than hedge funds, no lock-in periods and lower fees. However, they still have higher fees and less liquidity than most mutual funds. Long/short funds also may require higher minimum investments than other mutual funds. Long/short funds are more closely regulated than hedge funds therefore they have limitations on the use of leverage and derivatives where hedge funds do not.
 
Long/short funds can be a good investment for investors seeking targeted index exposure with some active management. Long/short funds also offer the advantage of hedging against changing market environments and other trends that active management can account for.
 
The most common long/short strategy is to be long 130% and short 30% (130 - 30 = 100%) of assets under management.To engage in a 130-30 strategy, an investment manager might rank the stocks used in the S&P 500 from best to worse on expected return, as signaled by past performance. A manager will use a number of data sources and rules for ranking individual stocks. Typically stocks are ranked according to a selection criteria (for example, total returns, risk-adjusted performance or relative strength) over a designated look-back period of six months or one year. The stocks are then ranked best to worst.
 
From the best ranking stocks, the manager would invest 100% of the portfolio's value and short sell the bottom ranking stocks, up to 30% of the portfolio's value. The cash earned from the short sales would be reinvested into top-ranking stocks, allowing for greater exposure to the higher ranking stocks.
 
ICON and RiverPark are two of the top performing long/short funds in 2017.
 
The ICON Long/Short fund had year to date performance of 25.96% as of December 1, 2017. The fund’s investable universe includes all equity securities traded in the U.S. market. It uses the S&P 1500 Index as its benchmark. The fund uses quantitative analysis to identify undervalued and overvalued securities in the investment universe. It then takes long positions in stocks it believes to be undervalued and short positions in stocks it believes to be overvalued.
 
The RiverPark Long/Short Opportunity Fund is another top performing fund in the category. Year to date as of December 1, 2017 the Fund had a return of 24.07%. The Fund uses a proprietary investment process for identifying undervalued and overvalued securities. It also has a transparent framework for its portfolio holdings. The Fund invests in U.S. equities across all market capitalizations and may also invest in foreign equities. It seeks to buy undervalued companies and take short positions on overvalued companies. It generally holds 40 to 60 long positions and 40 to 75 short positions.

A low/no documentation loan allows a potential borrower to apply for a mortgage while providing little or no information regarding their employment, income, or assets. Regulation of these loans has evolved significantly since 2008, but they remain an option for some borrowers in nontraditional financial situations.
 
Borrowers who seek out these products tend to have nontraditional income streams that may be more difficult to document in a traditional mortgage application. Examples might include alternative investments or self-employment arrangements where the borrower minimizes income reporting for tax purposes. Lenders considering these loans tend to focus on the applicant’s credit score, ability to make a larger than normal downpayment, and nontraditional documentation such as bank statements. Interest rates on these loans tend to be higher than traditionally documented mortgages.
 
A low/no documentation loan may sound like a throwback to the pre-2008 days of liar loans and subprime lending, but it remains an option for some segments of the mortgage industry. The term’s origins do lie in the build-up to the real estate crash of 2008. In the early and mid-2000s, lenders who were feeling pressure to issue loans with more favorable terms loosened documentation requirements to the point that low-documentation products became commonplace. NINJA loans were one class of these products. NINJA is an acronym for "no income, job or asset verification." Lenders often extended these loans to borrowers based purely on their credit scores, without any further documentation of the individual’s ability to make payments.
 
NINJA and other low-documentation loans—along with subprime lending practices—led directly to the crash of 2008. The housing market slowed in the mid-2000s, and borrowers were increasingly unable to keep up with required payments. Regulatory responses to this meltdown included a 2008 rule enacted by the Federal Reserve through the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) that required lenders to verify a borrower’s ability to make payments on any loan where a higher interest rate was imposed due to a weaker applicant profile. The 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act followed, and a modification to Dodd-Frank known as the ability to repay rule was finalized by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) in January 2013. This rule required lenders to adequately determine any borrower’s ability to make required monthly mortgage payments. Lenders who failed to do so would be subject to penalties established by the U.S. Congress.
 
Many of the riskiest low/no documentation loan categories, such as NINJA loans, disappeared after the crash of 2008 and the passage of Dodd-Frank. The ability to repay rule, however, allowed some room for low-documentation loans, including a class known as alternative documentation loans.
 
A 2018 law repealing portions of the Dodd-Frank Act loosened standards for potential loans to be considered qualifying mortgages. The ability to repay rule was not affected by this law, but the law made it easier for borrowers to avoid the low-documentation classification. Many smaller banks pushed for this adjustment, arguing that the Dodd-Frank restrictions were unnecessarily onerous on these banks. They argued that national lenders had abandoned riskier loans that could prove beneficial to local communities, and that smaller banks could support the recovery of real estate markets with more lenient lending practices.
