
Labor market flexibility is an important part of the labor market. It allows companies to make certain decisions about changing their labor force as a response to fluctuations in the market and to help boost production.
 
Organizations can make modifications to their labor pool based on certain factors such as employee hiring and firing, compensation and benefits, and working hours and conditions. Companies do not have carte blanche, however, to implement a flexible labor market because of laws and policies that protect employees and the labor pool.
 
Labor market flexibility refers to how quickly a firm responds to changing conditions in the market by making modifications to its workforce. A flexible labor market allows employers to make changes because of supply and demand issues, the economic cycle, and other market conditions.
 
But a truly flexible labor market only exists when there are few labor force regulations in place. When this is the case, employers are able to set wages, fire employees, and change their work hours at will. And the changes can go either way. For example, during tough economic times, an employer that has high flexibility can cut wages and increase the number of work hours that employees are expected to work to boost productivity. Conversely, when the economy is strong, the same employer may decide to give employees a slight raise and cut back on their hours.
 
Less flexible labor markets are subject to more rules and regulations including minimum wages, restrictions on firing, and other laws involving employment contracts. Labor unions often have considerable power in these markets.
 Labor unions can limit labor market flexibility by negotiating higher wages, benefits, and better working conditions with employers. 
Some of the other factors that affect labor market flexibility include employee skills and training, occupational mobility, minimum wages, part-time and temporary work, and job-related information available to employees from the employer.
 
Supporters of increased labor market flexibility argue that it leads to lower unemployment rates and higher gross domestic product (GDP) due to the unintended consequences of tight labor market restrictions. For example, a firm may consider hiring a full-time employee, but fear the employee will be extremely difficult to fire and may claim costly worker's compensation or sue based on alleged unfair treatment. The firm may choose to take on short-term contract workers instead.
 
Such a system benefits the relatively small number of full-time employees with especially secure positions, but hurts those on the outside—those who must move between precarious, short-term gigs.
 
Proponents of tough labor market regulations, on the other hand, claim that flexibility puts all the power in the hands of the employer, resulting in an insecure workforce. The labor movement began in the 19th century in the U.S. and Europe as a response to dangerous and dirty workplace conditions, extremely long shifts, exploitative practices by management and owners—wage garnishing, threats, and other abuse—and arbitrary dismissals.
 
Employers had little incentive to ensure that workplace injuries and deaths were rare, since they faced no consequences for creating hazardous conditions, and employees who could no longer work were easy to replace.
 
This article addressed some of the factors that affect flexibility in the labor market above. We'll outline what a few of those factors mean for the labor market in this section.
 
Also called trade unions, these organizations represent the collective interests of a group of workers. Employees can band together through their union to initiate negotiations for better wages, working conditions, benefits, and working hours making the market less flexible.
 
When employees are skilled and have ready access to training to improve on or increase their skills, they are better able to respond to changes in the market. For example, a customer service representative who goes back to school to get training in the information technology (IT) sector is able to respond to the growing demand for IT technicians when vacancies arise.
 
State and federal regulations limit how low employers can set the base pay per hour for employees. These minimums are based on changes in the cost of living and inflation. Some employers feel higher minimum wages cut into their productivity as well as their bottom line.
 
People rely on the information provided by employers about the jobs available in the market. The more informed job seekers are about open positions, the easier it is for employees to respond to fluctuating conditions within a company's workforce and in the market, making it much more flexible.
