
Liquidity refers to the ease with which an asset, or security, can be converted into ready cash without affecting its market price.
 
In other words, liquidity describes the degree to which an asset can be quickly bought or sold in the market at a price reflecting its intrinsic value. Cash is universally considered the most liquid asset because it can most quickly and easily be converted into other assets. Tangible assets, such as real estate, fine art, and collectibles, are all relatively illiquid. Other financial assets, ranging from equities to partnership units, fall at various places on the liquidity spectrum.
 
For example, if a person wants a $1,000 refrigerator, cash is the asset that can most easily be used to obtain it. If that person has no cash but a rare book collection that has been appraised at $1,000, she is unlikely to find someone willing to trade them the refrigerator for their collection. Instead, she will have to sell the collection and use the cash to purchase the refrigerator. That may be fine if the person can wait for months or years to make the purchase, but it could present a problem if the person only had a few days. She may have to sell the books at a discount, instead of waiting for a buyer who was willing to pay the full value. Rare books are an example of an illiquid asset.
 
There are two main measures of liquidity:
 
Generally, in using these formulas, a ratio greater than one is desirable.
 
Current Ratio = Current Assets / Current Liabilities
 
Quick Ratio = (Cash and Cash Equivalents + Short-Term Investments + Accounts Receivable) / Current Liabilities
 
Acid-Test Ratio (Var) = (Current Assets - Inventories - Prepaid Costs) / Current Liabilities
 
Cash Ratio = (Cash and Cash Equivalents + Short-Term Investments) / Current Liabilities
 
In terms of investments, equities as a class are among the most liquid assets. But not all equities are created equal when it comes to liquidity. Some shares trade more actively than others on stock exchanges, meaning there is more of a market for them. In other words, they attract greater, more consistent interest from traders and investors. These liquid stocks are usually identifiable by their daily volume, which can be in the millions, or even hundreds of millions, of shares.
 
For example, on April 26, 2019, 8.4 million shares of Amazon.com (AMZN) traded on the NASDAQ.﻿﻿ Liquid as that sounds, it's not a drop in the bucket compared to Intel (INTC), which led the NASDAQ that day, with a volume of 72 million shares—or to Ford Motor (F), which led the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) with a volume of 156 million shares, making it the most liquid stock in the U.S. that day.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
 NYSE. "AMAZON COM INC AMZN." Accessed July 25, 2020. NYSE. ”FORD MOTOR CO F.” Accessed Sept. 14, 2020. Nasdaq. "INTC Historical Data." Accessed July 25, 2020.