
A Locked-in Retirement Account (LIRA) is a type of registered pension fund in Canada that does not permit withdrawals before retirement except in exceptional circumstances. The locked-in retirement account is designed to hold pension funds for a former plan member, an ex-spouse, or a surviving spouse.
 
Cash withdrawals are not permitted while the funds are locked in. Pension funds that are transferred to a LIRA can be used to purchase a life annuity or can be transferred to a life income fund (LIF) or a locked-in retirement income fund (LRIF).
 
Once the fund's beneficiary reaches retirement age, the life annuity, LIF, or LRIF provide a pension for life.
 
A LIRA may be created to hold funds that are transferred from a pension plan for a variety of reasons. The beneficiary may have left the job. The fund may be split with a divorced spouse, or the beneficiary may have died, leaving the fund to an heir.
 
A Registered Retirement Savings Plan (RRSP) can be cashed in at the owner's discretion. The LIRA does not have such an option.
 
According to the Quebec government website:
 
LIRA plans are governed by federal or provincial pension legislation. Depending on the province in which the plan owner lives, there are different rules on how to unlock locked-in pension funds. Every locked-in pension must comply with the legislation of a specific province or the federal legislation.
 The owner of a LIRA can transfer the money to another retirement account. 
Various allowable reasons for unlocking a LIRA include low Income, potential foreclosure, eviction from a rental, first month’s rent and security deposit, high medical or disability costs, shortened life expectancy, and permanent departure from Canada.
 
Unlocking 50% of a LIRA can be done one time if you are 55 years old or older in some provinces and federally. Small balance unlocking is allowed if the balance is under a certain amount.
 
It's best to consult a financial advisor if the amounts involved are substantial.
