
An American depositary receipt (ADR) is a negotiable certificate issued by a U.S. depository bank representing a specified number of shares—often one share—of a foreign company's stock. The ADR trades on U.S. stock markets as any domestic shares would.
 
ADRs offer U.S. investors a way to purchase stock in overseas companies that would not be available otherwise. Foreign firms also benefit, as ADRs enable them to attract American investors and capital without the hassle and expense of listing on U.S. stock exchanges.
 
ADRs are denominated in U.S. dollars, with the underlying security held by a U.S. financial institution, often by an overseas branch. ADR holders do not have to transact the trade in the foreign currency or worry about exchanging currency on the forex market. These securities are priced and traded in dollars and cleared through U.S. settlement systems.﻿﻿
 
To offer ADRs, a U.S. bank will purchase shares on a foreign exchange. The bank will hold the stock as inventory and issue an ADR for domestic trading. ADRs list on either the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or the Nasdaq, but they are also sold over-the-counter (OTC).﻿﻿
 
U.S. banks require that foreign companies provide them with detailed financial information. This requirement makes it easier for American investors to assess a company's financial health.﻿﻿
 
American depositary receipts come in two basic categories:
 
One primary difference between the two types of ADRs is where investors can buy them. All except the lowest level of sponsored ADRs register with the SEC and trade on major U.S. stock exchanges. Unsponsored ADRs will trade only over-the-counter. Also, unsponsored ADRs never include voting rights.﻿﻿
 
ADRs are additionally categorized into three levels, depending on the extent to which the foreign company has accessed the U.S. markets:
 
An ADR may represent the underlying shares on a one-for-one basis, a fraction of a share, or multiple shares of the underlying company.﻿﻿ The depositary bank will set the ratio of U.S. ADRs per home-country share at a value that they feel will appeal to investors. If an ADR’s value is too high, it could deter some investors. Conversely, if it is too low, investors may think the underlying securities resemble riskier penny stocks.
 
Because of arbitrage, an ADR's price closely tracks that of the company's stock on its home exchange.
 
Holders of ADRs realize any dividends and capital gains in U.S. dollars. However, dividend payments are net of currency conversion expenses and foreign taxes. Usually, the bank automatically withholds the necessary amount to cover expenses and foreign taxes. Since this is the practice, American investors would need to seek a credit from the IRS or a refund from the foreign government's taxing authority to avoid double taxation on any capital gains realized.﻿﻿
 Easy to track and trade Denominated in dollars Available through U.S. brokers Offer portfolio diversification Could face double taxation Limited selection of companies Unsponsored ADRs may not be SEC-compliant Investor's may incur currency conversion fees 
Before American depositary receipts were introduced in the 1920s, American investors who wanted shares of a non-U.S. listed company could only do so on international exchanges—an unrealistic option for the average person back then.
 
While easier in the contemporary digital age, purchasing shares on international exchanges still has potential drawbacks. One particularly daunting roadblock is currency-exchange issues. Another important drawback is the regulatory differences between U.S. exchanges and foreign exchanges.
 
Before investing in an internationally traded company, U.S. investors have to familiarize themselves with the different financial authority's regulations, or they could risk misunderstanding important information, such as the company's financials. They might also need to set up a foreign account, as not all domestic brokers can trade internationally.
 
ADRs were developed because of the complexities involved in buying shares in foreign countries and the difficulties associated with trading at different prices and currency values. J.P. Morgan’s (JPM) predecessor firm Guaranty Trust Co. pioneered the ADR concept. In 1927, it created and launched the first ADR, enabling U.S. investors to buy shares of famous British retailer Selfridges and helping the luxury depart store tap into global markets. The ADR was listed on the New York Curb Exchange. A few years later, in 1931, the bank introduced the first sponsored ADR for British music company Electrical & Musical Industries (also known as EMI), the eventual home of the Beatles.﻿﻿ Today, J.P. Morgan and another U.S. bank – BNY Mellon – continue to be actively involved in the ADR markets.
 
Between 1988 and 2018, German car manufacturer Volkswagen AG traded OTC in the U.S. as a sponsored ADR under the ticker VLKAY. In August 2018, Volkswagen terminated its ADR program.﻿﻿ The next day, J.P. Morgan established an unsponsored ADR for Volkswagen, now trading under the ticker VWAGY.﻿﻿
 
Investors who held the old VLKAY ADRs had the option of cashing out, exchanging the ADRs for actual shares of Volkswagen stock—trading on German exchanges—or exchanging them for the new VWAGY ADRs.
 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Investor Bulletin: American Depositary Receipts." Accessed Sept. 14, 2020. Internal Revenue Service. "Memorandum: Depositary Receipts Program," Pages 2-3. Accessed Sept. 14, 2020. J.P. Morgan. "Depositary Receipts: 90 Years of Innovation." Accessed Sept. 14, 2020. Citi. "Depositary Receipt Services: Volkswagen AG." Accessed Sept. 14, 2020. J.P. Morgan. "Volkswagen (VWAGY)." Accessed Sept. 14, 2020.