
The Cambridge Judge Business School is the graduate business school at Cambridge University, located in Cambridge in the United Kingdom. Founded in 1990, it is widely regarded as one of the most prestigious business schools in the world.
 
The Cambridge Judge Business School is known for its connections to the United Kingdom’s technology startup sector, commonly referred to as “Silicon Fen” due to its location in the English Fenlands. It is also known for its friendly rivalry with Oxford University’s Saïd Business School. 
 
In 2019, the Cambridge Judge Business School’s full-time MBA program was rated as the 16th-best program globally by the Financial Times, with the Executive MBA receiving the 18th-place rating. The school’s Master of Finance program obtained an even more favorable rating, scoring as the second-best program worldwide.
 
Previously known as the Judge Institute of Management, the school became known as the Cambridge Judge Business School in 2010. The school is named in recognition of Sir Paul and Lady Judge, whose donations were instrumental in funding various campus development projects between 1991 and 1995.
 
Today, Cambridge Judge Business School is home to roughly 400 students, along with about 70 full-time faculty members. Admission to the school is notoriously competitive, with an average applicant GMAT rating of nearly 700 in 2019. Of the approximately 1,100 students who applied to the school’s MBA program in 2019, only 202 were admitted. At the faculty level, Cambridge Judge Business School is home to world-renowned experts in a variety of fields, including finance and accounting, business strategy, organizational psychology, and public policy.
 
The Cambridge Judge Business School is also known for providing a highly diverse program, with students and faculty hailing from all across the world. The 2019 MBA cohort, for instance, included 41 nationalities, and 35% of the students identified as female. In addition to the full-time MBA program, which lasts for 12 months, the school also offers an Executive MBA program designed for students who wish to study on a part-time basis while continuing to work in their careers.
 
With an annual tuition of roughly £57,000, graduates of the Cambridge Judge Business School saw an average starting salary of just over £95,000 in 2019, and over 90% of their graduates received their offers within three months of graduation. Historically, these grads have found employment principally in the technology and consulting sectors, with Microsoft (MSFT), Amazon (AMZN), and McKinsey & Company being among their largest individual employers.
