
A justified wage refers to an income level determined by market dynamics, work experience, education and skill. A justified wage is the wage level that is high enough to attract workers but low enough to enable employers to offer employment. The divergence between a justified wage and the legal minimum wage may depend on several factors including the state of the economy and level of unemployment.
 
A justified wage combines economic factors of supply and demand in the workforce with more social and culturally relevant inputs like work experience, education and skills training, and type of job. A wage is justified when it is seen as socially acceptable while at the same time economically feasible for both workers and employers.
 
For instance, the justified wage for a worker in a fast-food chain with two years of experience may be around $10 per hour. An investment banker in a large city like New York, on the other hand, may command a justified wage of upwards of $150,000 with the same two years of experience.
 
In a recession, the actual level of wages for this worker may drop to just above minimum wage due to the high level of unemployment and a stagnant economy. After the Great Recession, many investment banks justified lower wages due to slow economic growth. To learn more about investment banker wages, see: What Drives Investment Banker Salaries.
 
Companies may compare their employees' salaries and work experience when determining a justified wage. For example, Meagan, a current employee, has 10 years' experience and receives a salary of $65,000. Based on this information, management determines that Paul’s justified wage is $60,000 given that he has eight years' experience. Management may also consider other factors when establishing a justified wage, such as what responsibilities the employee has and the revenue they generate. For instance, the amount of commission a stockbroker writes could justify his or her wage. Employees can help determine their justified wage during pay reviews by discussing how they add value to the company.
 
When determining a justified wage for a CEO, the board of directors of a company typically considers:
