
Your portfolio might include any combination of financial assets, such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, ETFs, 401(k)s, and IRAs. Keeping track of all these assets can be a challenging, if not daunting, task. It's important to routinely know what’s going on with all your investments—not just once a year when you get your tax forms.
 
Fortunately, several mobile apps offer real-time information on all your investments in a one-stop place. Here are four popular portfolio management apps that track your investments at a glance.
 
More than 2.4 million people track their finances with Personal Capital, which has more than 22,000 investment clients in all US states (as of December 2019).﻿﻿ Sync nearly any investment account, including retirement and taxable accounts, and then track performance, allocation, and fees with easy-to-read graphs and charts. Track investments by account, asset class, or individual security. The Personal Capital “You Index” tracks your holdings and measures their performance against major market indices, so you can see how you’re doing across your stock, cash, ETF, and mutual fund positions.
 
The Portfolio Checkup feature determines if you can save money on mutual fund fees, and the Asset Allocation Review uncovers opportunities for diversification. Work with a personal wealth management advisor to discuss your investment needs via FaceTime, email, or phone. The app's bank-level security uses a two-step remote authentication process.
 
Use investment company SigFig's Wealth Management app to track all your investment accounts for free. SigFig automatically pulls your investment accounts from more than 50 leading brokerages into a single dashboard to give you a real-time view of every stock, mutual fund, ETF, and option you own.﻿﻿ Plus, it provides snapshots of your 401(k) plan and IRAs. You’ll get weekly email summaries of account performance, news that impacts your portfolio, and alerts that focus on your top gainers and losers.
 
The app automatically analyzes your portfolio to find hidden fees and overexposure to a single stock/industry. For a fee, users can optimize their returns with automated investing. SigFig will optimize your portfolio and provide daily monitoring to keep it on track with rebalancing, dividend reinvestment, and tax-efficient strategies.
 
The Ticker app lets you manage multiple stock portfolios—think growth, technology, and retirement portfolios—from one dashboard.﻿﻿ Colorful charts, graphs, and detailed analytics show real-time account values, profit/loss, daily profit/loss, allocation money-weighted rate of return (MWRR), and time-weighted rate of return (TWRR), plus symbol-relevant news. Manually enter trade information for stocks, currency pairs like EUR/USD, mutual funds, and ETFs, including dividends, splits, buy/sell orders, ticker symbol, trade size, price, date, and brokerage fees. Keep track of stocks with multiple watch lists, and create alerts to notify you if a stock trades above or below a trigger level you set, based on price, volume, and percent changes.
 
The Yahoo! Finance app has a simple-to-use design, so you can easily track your stocks, commodities, bonds, and currencies.﻿﻿ Get personalized news and alerts and follow market movements in real-time. Adjust the watch-lists and get live quotes as you monitor your portfolio's performance.
 
Yahoo! Finance is one of the largest business news sites in the US with data, commentary, and press releases among its daily content. Of course, Yahoo! Finance app users also have fast access to this breaking information at a glance.
 
Portfolio management apps track your investments easily from anywhere and at any time. Some apps sync with your existing accounts, while others require you to manually enter information on your holdings. In either case, such apps provide up-to-the-minute information—so you know where you stand now—as well as provide tools to help you get where you want to be in the future.
 Personal Capital. "Award-Winning Financial Tools, Backed by Expert Advisors." Accessed March 4, 2020. Google Play. "SigFig Wealth Management." Accessed March 4, 2020. Ticker. "Stocks Portfolio Manager." Accessed March 4, 2020. Yahoo! "Yahoo Finance App." Accessed March 4, 2020.