
If you're an income-hungry investor, a stagnating stock market or crumbling yields on certificates of deposit (CDs), money markets, and bonds can put a big dent in your cash flow.
 
When this happens, there's a short-term structured investment product that you might want to consider: reverse convertible notes (RCNs). These securities provide a predictable, steady income that can outpace traditional returns—even those of high-yield bonds. They also come with a healthy dose of risk. Read on to consider whether these notes would be a good addition to your portfolio.
 
Reverse convertible notes are coupon-bearing investments with payouts at maturity. They are generally based on the performance of an underlying stock. Most maturities on RCNs range from three months to one year.﻿﻿
 
Large financial institutions usually issue the notes. However, the companies whose stocks are linked to the RCNs have no involvement at all in the products.﻿﻿
 
RCNs consist of two parts:
 
When you buy an RCN, you are actually selling the issuer the right to deliver the underlying asset to you at some point in the future.﻿﻿
 
Before maturity, RCNs pay out the stated coupon rate, usually as quarterly payments. This constant rate reflects the general volatility of the underlying stock, with greater potential volatility in the stock's performance, the more risk the investor takes. The higher the risk, the more value you get for the put option; this translates into a higher coupon rate.﻿﻿
 
When the RCN matures, you'll receive either 100% of your original investment back or a predetermined number of the underlying stock's shares. This number is determined by dividing your original investment amount by the stock's initial price.
 
There are two structures used to determine whether you will receive your original investment amount or the stock:
 
For example, suppose your $13,000 RCN investment includes an 80% knock-in (or barrier) level, and the underlying stock's initial price is $65. If during the term, the stock never closes at $52 or less, and the final price of the stock is higher than the knock-in price of $52, and you'll get your original investment of $13,000 back.
 
If it had closed at $52 or less at any time during the life of the investment and the final price is lower than the initial price of $65 (let's say $60), you'll get the predetermined amount of stock, which would be $13,000 ÷ $65 = 200 shares. This would only be worth $12,000 if you sold those shares at that time.
 
If the underlying stock had closed higher than the initial buying price of $65, you would get your initial investment back in the end, regardless of whether the $52 threshold was broken.
 
Investing in RCNs involves is risky, and you can lose all or part of your principal at maturity. In addition, you do not participate in any increase in the underlying asset's value above the initial price. So, your total return is limited to the stated coupon interest rate.﻿﻿
 
However, there are a few other risks that you should further be aware of before you consider investing in RCNs:
 
RCNs could be suitable for investors looking for predictable, higher-income streams than can be found on traditional fixed-income investments and can tolerate the risk of losing some of the principal.
 
Investors should only buy into RCNs when they believe that the underlying stock will not drop below the knock-in level. Keep in mind that the companies who sell these investments are betting that the stock price will drop below the set barrier, or at least be volatile enough to make this a possibility.
 
With higher risk, there should be a higher potential reward, and this is true for RCNs. After all, where else can you invest as little as $1,000, get a double-digit yield on your money, and only tie it up for a relatively short time?﻿﻿
 
But don't think that RCNs are an alternative to your CDs, because the principal is not guaranteed. Also, you should be comfortable with the RCN's underlying company because you could end up with shares of its stock when your RCN matures. So be sure to read the offering circular and prospectus carefully before investing. Finally, you should only invest in RCNs if you understand the ins and outs of options.
 FINRA. "Reverse Convertibles: Complex Investment Vehicles." Accessed May 14, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Investor Bulletin: Structured Notes." Accessed May 14, 2020.