
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
With so many different types of online stock brokers available to investors, it can be tough to choose one that works best for you. That’s why we put these U.S.-based online brokers through a comprehensive review process that included hands-on research to determine the best in the industry.
 
Over the last few years, online brokers have increasingly adopted the mantra, “mobile-first.” As more investors and traders use tablets or smartphones as their primary platform, online brokers have made efforts to improve their mobile apps, which in turn attract more mobile users. The best online investing apps offer a consistent experience between desktop and mobile platforms, including sharing watch lists and alerts as well as tools such as stock screeners and depositing checks into your account.
 
TD Ameritrade has the distinction of being our pick for the best overall stock trading app in our 2020 Online Broker Review. In fact, TD Ameritrade has two of the best apps for stock trading as it allows investors to select between the TD Ameritrade Mobile App and thinkorswim Mobile. Either app is excellent for stock trading, but the TD Ameritrade Mobile App is geared towards basic investing with an excellent account summary, price alerts, and a wealth of news and research. Buy and hold investors in particular will be able to do their trading through the mobile app, freeing them from having to deal with TD Ameritrade’s more cluttered desktop interface. 
 
For traders and more active investors, the thinkorswim mobile platform is an acceptable substitute for the full desktop trading platform. Generally we review the trading functions of mobile apps through the lens of position maintenance while away from the full platform, but thinkorswim and a select few other apps have reached the point where a trader can reasonably plan, assess, and open complex trades on the go. The thinkorswim mobile app workflow for options, stocks, and futures is intuitive and powerful. Traders will find lots of bells and whistles that make the mobile app a complete solution for most trading purposes, including streaming real-time data and the ability to trade from charts. Both apps are very similar to the full platform experiences, so transitioning back and forth is very fluid.
 
TD Ameritrade, specifically the TD Ameritrade Mobile App, also takes top spot in our review for the best app for beginners. For this category, we are looking at beginner investors who are new to the market rather than newer traders (active trading is covered below). TD Ameritrade’s app is both powerful, intuitive, and feature-rich without being overwhelming. 
 TD Ameritrade mobile apps are well-designed and give investors the choice between an investment-focused app and a trading-focused app. Both apps give customers a simple one-page experience where they can quickly check in on the markets and their account. Watchlists and customizations sync across all TD Ameritrade platforms, including both mobile apps. All available asset classes can be traded on the mobile apps. The tools and features available in the apps differ by design, but hybrid investors (swing traders, for example) may find themselves switching between the two to get access to the tools and analysis they need. 
TD Ameritrade has the best apps for stock trading overall, but Interactive Brokers has the edge when it comes to active trading. This shouldn’t come as a surprise as Interactive Brokers took nearly every important trading category in our 2020 review with the exception of options trading. Whether you are using the powerful Traders Workstation (TWS) or the mobile app meant to give you the core features on the go, Interactive Brokers is geared for active traders. The Interactive Brokers app has nearly all the functionality of the firm’s web-based platform, but it is understandably limited in comparison to the TWS desktop app. That said, you can queue up trades for all asset classes and data streams in real time.
 
Interactive Brokers’ mobile app is one of a very few that make it possible for traders to assess the market and open new positions on the go as opposed to simply monitoring existing trades. While the mobile app has great research, excellent charts, and a wide selection of indicators, the lack of drawing tools and some other limitations will still result in most active traders preferring the full featured TWS experience when possible. Compared to other mobile apps for active traders, however, Interactive Brokers’ app is a step ahead.
 Interactive Brokers’ mobile app comes close to mimicking the website experience with full order ability and the scanners and alerts active traders expect. An intuitive trading workflow through the app is combined with the ability to set order presets for faster entry. Mobile charts come with a suite of useful indicators for quick trading decisions. Data streams in real-time across only one platform at a time. That said, only traders who have a multi-device approach to their workflow will be affected by this limitation. There are no drawing tools in the mobile app. 
Tastyworks does not suffer from a lack of focus. The brokerage is very focused on options traders, and this focus has allowed tastyworks’ mobile app to unseat Interactive Brokers in this area. While Interactive Brokers is still the standard for active traders, traders who are mainly using options strategies will find tastyworks’ app a better fit.
 
The tastyworks mobile workflow is designed for options order entry, making the process quick and intuitive. Options traders use drag and drop to choose the legs of an options spread, eliminating keyboard entry. Despite this ease of entry, the tastyworks mobile app is better thought of as a short-term substitute for the desktop platform. While you can enter new positions and exit existing ones, the app lacks some of the features available in the desktop platform for researching and analyzing trades. For heavy options trading, it is difficult to match the full feature set and extra visual space that comes with the desktop platforms.
 Traders can use a drag and drop selection for options legs in the tastyworks mobile app. The tastyworks app is streamlined for options trading. There are no unnecessary features and nothing to distract from the core function. Tastytrade video feed is available through the mobile app. You can’t open an account through the tastyworks mobile app. The app won’t replace the desktop for heavy traders, but it can be used to monitor and exit existing positions.