
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Charles Schwab, both the man and the full-service brokerage that bears his name, made a huge move on fees that rippled through the industry in the fall of 2019. Schwab also announced two significant acquisitions towards the end of the year. Schwab cut its equity and ETF commissions to $0 in conjunction with the publication of its eponymous founder’s book, “Invested.” Schwab acquired USAA’s Investment Management Co. in July, but that takeover was overshadowed by the planned acquisition of competitor TD Ameritrade, which was announced in November. The TD Ameritrade acquisition has passed all the regulatory hurdles, and is expected to close the first week of October 2020.
 
We’ll look at how Schwab ranks in an industry it has shaken up and whether it is the right broker for your portfolio needs. We've also reviewed the Charles Schwab Intelligent Portfolios robo-advisor service.
 
Charles Schwab is a full-service investment firm with technology that can suit a wide variety of investors, from active traders and self-directed investors who handle their own investing to clients who are looking for investment advice and portfolio management. Futures traders have to open a separate account, but unlike Fidelity, clients have access to that asset class.
 Extremely robust ETF screener on StreetSmart Edge Deep level of customizability on its StreetSmart Edge platform Mobile web platforms and native mobile apps offer the same functionality No automatic cash sweeps Limited and basic ETF screener on the website Almost all derivatives tools are on StreetSmart Edge 
Like many online brokers, Schwab struggles to pack everything into a single website. Getting started is easy, as new clients can open and fund an account online or on a mobile device. However, the website’s navigation involves two-level menus that are lengthy with dozens of choices, and occasionally cause confusion.
 
Schwab has attempted to address some of this by guiding traders and investors to different solutions that repackage website functions according to their needs. Trade Source is meant for more buy-and-hold investing, with all the relevant charts and research displayed in a clean interface. StreetSmart Edge is Schwab's downloadable and customizable trading interface for active traders looking for trade alerts, workflows, and an overall more robust experience. StreetSmart Edge can also be launched from the cloud but it requires installing a third-party application, Citrix, the first time it's run on a particular device. Although StreetSmart Edge is easier to navigate and has streaming real-time data, it is missing some of the screeners available on the website. 
 
Placing a trade through the main website, Trade Source, and StreetSmart Edge is simple and straightforward. The view of your portfolio is slightly different with all three, but all show your holdings and the changes in value. Trade Source again has the cleanest visual representation, but there is little immediate analysis of your holdings beyond a basic allocation view.
 
Navigation on Schwab's mobile app is very similar to the website. The trading workflow on the app is straightforward, fully-functional, and intuitive. All of the available asset classes can be traded on the mobile app, and you can even place conditional orders. Your watchlists are the same across all Schwab platforms unless you are using the downloadable version of StreetSmart Edge and choose to save the watchlist on your local device. The mobile app-based news feed is solid, but the fundamental research is relatively light compared to what you have available through the web view. The mobile app charting function provides a nice range of technical indicators, but no drawing tools. In other words, traders can monitor and place trades in a pinch, but StreetSmart Edge is the preferred platform for digging in deep.
 
Much of Schwab's trading experience is built around the All-In-One Trade Ticket, which works across platforms. This type of order entry will be familiar to most investors, but there are resources to help you along if you get stuck. Futures traders are welcome at Schwab, but that whole function is cordoned off under StreetSmartCentral rather than as part of the trade ticket system. Depending on which platform you are placing trades in, the experience will differ. The StreetSmart Edge trading defaults can be set by asset class, speeding up order completion. 
 
By comparison, there are fewer customization options on the website. In Trade Source, however, it is easy to have a selection of stocks streaming data and research with a wide selection of user-defined alerts. If a stock you are watching drops below a specific threshold or crosses its 15-day moving average (MA), for example, you can quickly jump to the tab and enter an order.  
 
Schwab allows clients to trade fractional shares of stock with the midyear launch of Schwab Stock Slices. This service allows investors to purchase fractional shares in 1-10 publicly traded companies in a single commission-free transaction. The stocks that can be traded are described as, "America’s leading companies from the S&P 500," with a minimum of $5 per symbol.
 
Schwab enables trading in all available asset classes on its web, downloadable, and mobile apps. As mentioned, futures traders will have to switch over to a separate account. There is no cryptocurrency trading enabled, though clients can trade the CBOE Bitcoin futures.  
 
Schwab clients can enter a wide variety of orders on the website and StreetSmart Edge, including conditional orders such as one-cancels-another and one-triggers-another. Clients can stage order for later entry on the web and on StreetSmart Edge.
 
 If you’ve been buying into a particular stock over time, you can select the tax lot when closing part of the position, or set an account-wide default for the tax lot choice (such as average cost, last-in-first-out, etc.). You can also set an account-wide default for dividend reinvestment.
 
Charles Schwab utilizes a proprietary wheel-based router for order management purposes, such as handling exchange outages, performing real-time execution quality reviews and handling volatile markets. Most orders in stocks and multiple-exchange listed options are routed to third-party wholesalers, balancing execution quality in terms of increased price improvement and improved execution quality statistics with its own cost savings. This score could be higher if Schwab had responded to our queries as written, but some of the responses were impossible to interpret. Quarterly information regarding execution quality is published on Schwab's website.﻿﻿
 
There is no trading simulator available to Schwab clients, nor is there the capability to automate and backtest a trading system.
 
Schwab kicked off the race to zero fees by major online brokers in early October 2019. At the time, the company stated, "We believe that removing one of the last remaining barriers to making investing accessible to everyone is the right thing to do for clients, and the fact that competitors soon followed our lead is a win for investors."
 
International trades incur a wide range of fees, depending on the market, so take a careful look at those commissions before entering an order.  
 
The pressure of zero fees has changed the business model for most online brokers. In lieu of fees, the way brokers make money from you is less obvious—as are some of the subtle ways they make money for you.
 
Schwab’s research offerings include flexible screeners for stocks, ETFs, mutual funds and fixed income, plus a variety of tools and calculators. 
 
For stocks, Screener Plus on StreetSmart Edge uses real-time streaming data, filtering stocks based on a range of fundamental and technical criteria, including technical signals from Recognia. Traders can set the parameters that are most important to them and then integrate Screener Plus results with their pre-defined watch lists. 
 
On the website, the screener includes MSCI ratings and 120 other criteria including Schwab equity ratings and 15 data points devoted to dividends. The ETF screener on StreetSmart Edge over 150 screening criteria including asset class, Morningstar category, fund performance, top ten holdings, regional exposure, and distribution yield. There are 16 predefined screens that can be customized. Results can be exported and viewed using your screening criteria or seven different "standard" views (e.g., ratings, fund performance, risk analysis, etc.). The ETF screener is available to both prospects (pre-login) and clients using StreetSmart Edge. The Schwab.com website has a very basic, somewhat old-fashioned screener.
 
The mutual fund screeners are rudimentary and look like something that one may have cooed over in 2002. The basic mutual fund screener has sixteen criteria selection, while the advanced screener offers 60 screening criteria. There are ten pre-defined screens with the ability to export your results. There are over 9,800 funds in the screening universe, which does not cover the 16,000+ that Schwab offers for sale. The mutual fund screener is available to both prospects (pre-login) and clients.
 
On the website, there are several pre-defined screeners that can be customized to the user's specifications; however, these screeners are really ugly and have little built-in help. There are also some options pricing and probability tools. 
 
The website has a basic-looking old school screener. Clients can search online for secondary market corporate bonds, municipal bonds, agency bonds, Treasuries, Treasury zeros, mortgage-backed securities and certificates of deposits (CDs). Search criteria for corporate bonds includes the sector and underlying stock symbol. 
 
On the website, you can access calculators for margins, portfolio mix, retirement and income guidance, tax efficiency, and others. You can also find tools for stock and advanced option strategy selection and hedging alternatives based on market outlook.
 
Idea Hub, a feature originally developed by optionsXpress (which Schwab acquired in 2011), offers options trading ideas bucketed into categories such as covered calls and premium harvesting. On StreetSmart Edge you'll find a long list of potential idea generators, including Idea Hub. You can add these tools as a tab to your layout to get back to your favorites quickly.
 
Schwab's news and research offerings are among the deepest of all online brokerages. Schwab offers its clients free access to news feeds from BondSource, MarketEdge, Schwab Investing Insights Brief, Argus Research Alerts, Briefing.com, Morningstar Equity Research Alerts, Business Wire, PR Newswire, Credit Suisse, CFRA, and Vickers Insider Activity. MarketEdge includes dozens of news feeds and analyst reports. You can also check out technical triggers as recognized by Recognia. Premium third party research offered at a discounted price include Briefing. Com premium services, Investor’s Business Daily, MarketEdge Platinum, Trader’s Library, XTF ETF Experts, Wiley Trading Bookstore, StockCharts.com, Fly on the Wall, Quantcha, Options Play, and others. Fees vary based on each vendor's offer, with extended trial subscriptions available for most services. 
 
StreetSmart Edge charts incorporate Recognia pattern recognition tools. Charting on the web is serviceable but more basic than on the StreetSmart Edge platform. Users can save all preferences, settings, studies, and layouts on both StreetSmart Edge and the website. Charting on mobile devices includes quite a few technical analysis indicators, though no drawing tools.
 
Schwab clients can link their non-Schwab accounts (investment and bank accounts, plus credit cards, loans, mortgages, and real estate from over 15,000 financial institutions) to get a full picture of their finances and investments that is automatically updated. You can see the combined total of all included accounts with a chart that makes it easy to track changes over time. The Schwab Portfolio Checkup Tool allowing you to analyze your investments, including those held outside Schwab, and calculate an internal rate of return. Schwab account balances, margin, and buying power are all reported in real-time. On the downside, there is no way to determine your expected income from dividends and interest.
 
StreetSmart Edge displays your positions along with balances, alerts, gains/losses, and transactions. As with all trading platforms, you are expected to know what you are doing, but there is a Notes tool that allows you to journal their trading activity and take a chart snapshot. This is helpful in evaluating your decision-making process after a trade has been made. Notes are not available on the website. 
 
Schwab launched a free digital financial planning tool, Schwab Plan, for all clients in August 2020, which is designed to help self-directed investors establish and stay on track towards their retirement goals. This tool can be found under the Guidance choice off the main menu on the Schwab website.
 
Schwab goes deep on investor education with their Schwab Live Daily broadcasts, research from the Schwab Center for Financial Research, an array of articles on the Insights & Ideas page, as well as webinars and in-person events for investors and traders.
 
There are 4-5 hours a day of live video in Schwab Live, accessible from the web and StreetSmart Edge platforms. The website has numerous video-based classes and other educational content, plus you can sign up for one of their regularly-scheduled webinars on various investing topics. There are archived webinars, sorted by topic, in Education Center.
 
You’ll find trading and economic commentary on Schwab.com, updated daily. The Ideas and Insights section has up-to-date trading education based on current market events. Life stage planning tools are mostly housed in the Intelligent Portfolio (robo-advisor) section of the website. Schwab's Knowledge Center acts as a combination FAQ and glossary while also offering help with the website, StreetSmart platform, and the mobile apps.﻿﻿
 
For retail clients calling customer support, Schwab says its average wait time on hold was 22 seconds. They are quick to respond to customer complaints on Twitter, though most ask the customer to send a direct message with a phone number for an offline discussion. Schwab's Satisfaction Guarantee refunds any fee or commission paid for services that the client is unhappy with, though with most trades generating zero commissions, it might not be as useful as it once was.﻿﻿
 
Schwab's security is up to industry standards: 
 
Schwab is a giant in the online brokerage space and it is only getting bigger if the acquisition of TD Ameritrade goes through. Due to its size and reach, Schwab is able to offer investors a wide array of services and tools including a top-notch mobile app. Over the last few years, Schwab seems to be encouraging its customers to work with an advisor, whether human or robo, as opposed to investing by yourself. That said, self-directed traders and investors can still choose to go it alone as the StreetSmart Edge and Trade Source platforms provide all the tools you will need. Unlike some of its direct competition, Schwab even welcomes futures traders even if it does make them play on yet another separate platform. 
 
One of the biggest changes in Schwab's business is, of course, the elimination of fees. Interestingly enough, this decision hasn't hurt Schwab as much as it has some of the competitors. Schwab makes the overwhelming majority of its income on uninvested cash that customers have in their accounts, so getting rid of commissions on equity trades wasn't as big a sacrifice as it appears. When it comes to this interest, however, Schwab could serve their clients better by passing a little more of it on and automating sweeps of uninvested cash.
 Investopedia is dedicated to providing investors with unbiased, comprehensive reviews and ratings of online brokers. Our reviews are the result of months of evaluating all aspects of an online broker’s platform, including the user experience, the quality of trade executions, the products available on its platforms, costs and fees, security, the mobile experience and customer service. We established a rating scale based on our criteria, collecting thousands of data points that we weighed into our star-scoring system. In addition, every broker we surveyed was required to fill out an extensive survey about all aspects of its platform that we used in our testing. Many of the online brokers we evaluated provided us with in-person demonstrations of its platforms at our offices.