
Cybersecurity refers to the measures taken to keep electronic information private and safe from damage or theft. It is also used to make sure these devices and data are not misused. Cybersecurity applies to both software and hardware, as well as information on the Internet, and can be used to protect everything from personal information to complex government systems.
 
Cybersecurity measures are put in place because any information stored on a computer, an electronic device, or on the Internet can be hacked. With the proper measures in place, this can be prevented. As the world is more reliant on computers than ever before, cybersecurity has become essential.
 
In order to ensure that a system is secure, one must understand the risks and vulnerabilities inherent to that specific device or network and whether or not these vulnerabilities are exploitable to hackers.
 
Threats to a computer system are classified by the method used to attack. While there are many types of cyberattacks, some of the most common types include the following:
 
Cybersecurity ranges from simple to complex. As a basic preventative measure, most devices come equipped with password protection to prevent hacking. If a system is attacked or at risk of an attack, specific measures might be taken depending on the type of attack. For example, disk encryption is one way to prevent direct-access attacks, whereas certain antivirus software can detect suspicious activity online and block most software attacks.
 
In order to be effective, cybersecurity measures must constantly adjust to new technologies and developments. Hackers adapt their methods to new forms of cybersecurity and render it ineffective, so security programs must always stay one step ahead.
 
While any individual system is at some level of cyberattack risk, larger entities such as businesses and government systems are often the targets of these attacks since they store a lot of valuable information. The Department of Homeland Security uses high-tech cybersecurity measures to protect sensitive government information from other countries, nation-states, and individual hackers.
 
Any financial system that stores credit card information from its users is at a high risk since hackers can directly steal money from people by accessing these accounts. Large businesses are often attacked, as they store personal information about their large network of employees. Other targets include systems that control infrastructures, such as telecommunications and energy networks, as attackers seek to control this equipment.
