
A dual interface chip card is a credit or debit card with an embedded chip that allows the card to be used in both contact and contactless transactions. Dual interface chip cards allow card readers to obtain the card’s identifying information through the use of a single chip.
 
The chip component of the dual interface card is typically embedded in an outer layer of PVC, polycarbonate or polyester.
 
Dual interface chip cards provide greater payment processing convenience. They can be used with both contact and contactless payment terminals. Many card issuers are now producing dual interface chip cards for their customers however the market has not fully adopted these types of cards.
 
Dual interface chip cards are being produced by more issuers as technology advances across the market. Many issuers have begun to issue these cards which make the checkout process much faster with merchants. Dual interface chip cards are becoming more popular but their added costs are one reason they have not been fully endorsed. Dual interface cards generally cost approximately twice as much as a chip card. While high volume production helps to keep manufacturing costs down, the added cost is a consideration.
 
Credit and debit cards have traditionally required a user to swipe the card through an electronic terminal. This allows the terminal to read the magnetic strip on the back of the card, which contains identifying information about the account. More recently, terminals have added new chip functionality and also begun to allow for both chip transactions and contactless transactions.
 
The dual interface chip card is a type of smart card with an embedded chip that can facilitate both contact and contactless transactions. The card number and user’s identifying information are still contained on the face of the card, and an EMV chip (Europay, MasterCard and Visa chip) may be used to provide added security in credit and debit card transactions. Generally, dual interface chip cards may also be known as integrated circuit cards. Overall, having a contactless chip, contact chip and a magnetic strip allows the cardholder to complete transactions on a wider variety of machines.
 
Contactless chip cards allow identifying information to be easily read by a sensor. Contactless terminals are commonly used by employees who have identification badges that must be tapped or waved past a sensor in order to gain access to a building or room. Merchants that want to take advantage of dual interface chip cards must upgrade their card terminal so that it can accept both contact and contactless chip cards. Many merchants have upgraded their terminals to allow for contactless payment transactions because they are faster and can help decrease waiting times for stores with high volumes of transactions.
