
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Founded in 2004, Geneva-based Dukascopy Bank now offers a full range of banking services in an addition to a large brokerage operation focused primarily on contracts for difference (CFDs). They also own and operate the unique Swiss FX Marketplace (SWFX) ECN. Separate divisions in Geneva, Switzerland and Riga, Latvia provide services for Switzerland (which is not an EU member) and the rest of Europe.
 
The broker does an excellent job disclosing its higher-than-average trading costs and fees in a relatively small product catalog. A generous active trader's discount program offers an upgrade path to lower commissions and spreads, while a home-grown trading platform is on par with Metatrader 4, which features a subset of currency pairs and higher commissions. That's unfortunate because neither interface provides all the customization features required by mid- to upper-level account holders. The broker doesn't offer U.K. or Irish spread betting, denying clients the special tax advantages that affords.
 Proprietary JForex platforms Advanced charting iOS and Android sync with desktop Small product catalog Higher-than-average trading costs No two-factor authentication 
The broker is licensed in Switzerland through Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA) and in the EU through Financial and Capital Market Commission of Latvia (FCMC). The Swiss division protects clients up to CHF 100,000 in case of broker default while EU protection is limited to EUR 20,000. They offer no additional layers of coverage through private insurers. ESMA rules dictate negative balance protection but no similar commitment was found in the Swiss fine print. Slippage can be controlled through platform settings but only on the buy side, and they offer no guaranteed stop-loss protection.
 
Security features are lacking in the Java-based JForex desktop and web platforms as well as mobile apps, with no two-tier authentication, but the Metatrader desktop does permit one-time passwords (OTPs). Extensive documentation on best execution policies and average spreads builds confidence but disclosures admit the broker's SWFX ECN acts as a counterparty to trades, similar to a dealing desk, raising conflict of interest issues.
 
The proprietary JForex 3 desktop platform includes hundreds of indicators, advanced charting, historical testing, real-time news, and embedded customer support. On the other hand, customization is weak, with no ability to pop out charts or build complex desktops and watchlists. The web version of the Java-based software triggers security warnings in Chrome and other browsers, but a standalone version requires no Java installation. The web version is also hampered by a reduced feature set that includes less than 50 indicators. Order types are too basic in all platforms, lacking sophisticated conditional routing found at rival European brokers. Metatrader 4 offers an alternative but lists fewer currency pairs while incurring higher commissions. 
 
JForex mobile versions allow easy synching between platforms with well-organized menus but fewer charting features and limited customization. Order types are too basic, like desktop and web versions, with limited conditional routing. There's no two-tier authentication, and the broker charges fees if clients process more than 20 SMS message alerts per month. This is a throwback to an earlier Internet era, with little or no justification in 2019.
 
The unique Dukascopy Connect 911 app allows to clients to manage accounts, access community content that's also available at the website, and chat with support. The app is hampered by large quantities of nonfinancial content that include an anonymous dating function, distracting clients seeking quick answers to market, platform, or account-related issues.
 
The broker offers comprehensive research materials written or streamed by knowledgeable in-house analysts, frequently updated at the website and within the mobile apps. The impressive Dukascopy TV features hundreds of timely video clips as well as a comprehensive archive, well-organized menus, and a dedicated search function. Clients can download tick data, review social sentiment, read news culled through complex content filters and examine dozens of fundamentally or technically-oriented trading ideas. Materials are well-organized but can be overwhelming, raising the need for a single launch page rather than numerous submenus.
 
The site contains no dedicated educational section, with the majority of tutorial materials embedded within research content, FAQs, or video sections. It's possible to find that information by hunting and pecking through multiple topics, but the experience is likely to be frustrating for newer traders seeking to build skill sets. Meanwhile, product sections and trading platforms point to limited "how-to" articles and videos about forex, CFD, index, and cryptocurrency trading venues.
 
Traders can execute automated and algo strategies through JForex and FIX APIs. Platforms permit hedging while both JForex and Metatrader support historical back testing. The broker offers no local VPS but Metatrader users can access their hosting program for a monthly fee. Active traders, professionals, and institutions can access a suite of products that support direct-market access (DMA) and more advanced charting programs.
 
The SWFX Sentiment Index compiles buy and sell information on orders passing through the ECN but the JForex platforms do not support social or copy trading, forcing clients to work with Metatrader Expert Advisors or hook up an API. A comprehensive community site is mostly focused on leisure and other non-market topics, making it harder for serious-minded traders to gauge customer sentiment, build skill levels, or develop new strategies.
 
Dukascopy Bank provides a relatively small product catalog, with 61 currency pairs; 500 plus share CFDs; 24 index, bond, and commodity CFDs; and two cryptocurrency CFDs. Forex is traded only through CFDs and the broker offers no futures contracts, forward contracts, spot markets, or options coverage. Orders are routed through the SWFX ECN whenever possible, with that venue accessing multiple liquidity providers through a central marketplace. Although the ECN is designed to avoid conflicts of interest, the fine print states the venue acts as a counterparty.
 
Commissions and spreads are calculated through a declining tier system, with clients categorized by monthly trading volume, net deposit, or bottom-line equity. Dukascopy Bank bases segmentation on the highest of the three values in case of a conflict. Commission costs are clearly documented next to each tier on a trading fees page, but finding average spreads requires a review of daily, monthly, or quarterly SWFX execution data through a widget. That information should be also documented on the trading fees page because it can represent a healthy reduction in transaction costs.
