
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
eOption is very clear on who it wants as a customer and how it intends to meet their needs. This online brokerage wants options traders who already know what they are doing to come over to their platform and enjoy a significant cost savings on options trades. This deep discount approach won’t appeal to long-term investors or beginners, but it does provide active options traders with low commissions and speedy executions. We’ll look at eOption's range of offerings to help you decide whether it is a fit for your trading needs.
 
eOption targets options and equities traders who engage in the markets relatively frequently and who are comfortable with executing their own options strategies. The firm’s relatively low options fees are a draw for high volume options traders. Put simply, eOption doesn’t offer many bells and whistles, but it will help you trade a lot of options at a low price. 
 Offers great value for frequent options traders The browser-based eOption Trader platform is easy to use Newsletter subscribers can auto-trade their alerts Limited education offerings News feeds are limited Any OTCBB (penny stock) trades must be made with a live broker  
eOption has licensed the ETNA trading platform and customized it for their clients. ETNA is a white label software solution, meaning it is developed by a software company and licensed to online brokerages. The brokerages can customize the package and skin it to fit their brand, but the platform is managed by the developer in a software-as-a-service model. In practice, this means eOption Trader has the look and feel of a downloadable direct-access platform, but it runs in a browser. 
 
eOption's tab layout makes the available tools easy to find. Click on the Custom tab and you can drag and drop widgets to set a page up the way you want. You can add an options strategy to a watchlist and OptionsPlay is integrated into the platform, which are good features for the advanced options trader. You also can position an order entry widget wherever you want it on the screen.  
 
Unfortunately, the eOption mobile app isn't quite as friendly as the desktop HTML5 platform, but the look and feel are similar. While watchlists are shared between platforms, they are very hard to find on mobile. Moreover, the data on the mobile app does not stream. Research is quite constrained on the mobile app as well; almost all of the research sources are on the browser platform but not on mobile. That said, you can ask Alexa on your Amazon device for stock quotes if your hands are full, but that probably won’t satisfy traders looking for a fully mobile experience.
 
eOption's primary platform is the browser-based eOption Trader, but clients can connect to the trading engine (and associated commissions) using the downloadable DAS Trader or Sterling Trader Pro. The latter two platforms incur additional subscription fees.
 
In eOption trader, you can enter orders from the Trade tab or the Options Chains tab. All the costs of placing a trade, including exchange fees, are shown on the trade verification screen. This is an excellent feature because it gives you full cost transparency—more brokers should do this. You can enter conditional orders (one triggers another, one cancels another) on the browser platform but not on mobile app. Quotes stream on eOption’s browser platform, and there is a customizable ticker that runs across the top of the screen. You cannot stage orders for later entry.
 
The eOption mobile app lets you close or roll an existing position with a couple of taps. You cannot put in a stop and a limit order at the same time on mobile, but you can build an options strategy in the order ticket. The eOption mobile app is sufficient for position maintenance while you're on the go, but you'll want the browser-based app on a computer for your actual trading session.
 
The main reason to become an eOption customer is to trade options strategies in large quantities, but clients of eOption can trade U.S. equities, options, mutual funds and fixed income. There are no futures, futures options, international assets or currencies, or cryptocurrency. Beyond that, investors can trade:
 
On the eOption browser-based app, you can enter a variety of order types including conditional orders, trailing stops, and trailing stop limits. The order types are more restricted on the mobile app. You cannot select a tax lot when closing a position and the default is first-in-first-out. 
 
eOption’s order router prioritizes price improvement. The router sends equity orders to multiple venues simultaneously and manages to attain $0.01–$0.02 per share in price improvement. eOption does not accept payment for order flow on equity orders. For options, the order router works its way sequentially through the exchanges and attains on average $0.11 per contract in price improvement while making $0.43 per contract in payment for order flow.
 
You can automate trading signals from a newsletter at eOption but can't backtest strategies on the platform.
 
eOption joined the race to zero fees for equity trading in Oct. 2019, but still charges a per-leg fee for options trades. That said, the per-contract fee is very low and heavy options traders will pay less overall with eOption than at its competitors. Clearing and exchange fees, typically a fraction of a penny per share, are spelled out on the order confirmation screen and are passed through to customers.
 
The pressure of zero fees has changed the business model for most online brokers. In lieu of fees, the way brokers make money from you is less obvious—as are some of the subtle ways they make money for you. 
 
eOption offers clients several research amenities, free of charge, but here again it really only provides necessities. This spartan approach will work for the options traders, but other investors will not be impressed. There is no ETF-specific screener, but ETFs can show up in the stock screener results. There is no mutual fund or fixed income screener, no additional calculators or trading idea generators outside the screeners.
 
There is a Screener tab that includes 16 pre-set screens, and lets you set up customizable screens. You can't save custom scans. You can sort the columns that result from any screen and sort them, but you can't yet save the screen to use again.
 
eOption includes screeners from OptionsPlay, which allow you to look at their ideas or scan on your own idea. One nice touch is the ability to accept an OptionsPlay trading idea and put it directly into an eOption order ticket. At that point, you can hit Preview to edit the order ticket generated.
 
There are quite a few news feeds on the platform, though some link to premium sources that require an additional subscription. The browser platform scrapes numerous news sites—the list includes ApolloNews, Quote Media, PR Newswire, Canada Newswire, Business Wire, Market wired, GlobeNewswire, UPI, Market News Publishing, and Fly on the Wall. You tag the news sorter by topic, ticker symbol, industry, or person to bring in news about companies that you care about. If you click on an article, a new tab opens in your browser with the complete article.
 
There are links to Hammerstone research reports, but that is the extent of the third-party research.
 
eOption charts are powered by ChartIQ, Quote Media, OptionsPlay, and ETNA. You can link chart displays to watchlists so the ticker symbol changes when you click on a particular stock. There are about 30 technical studies available.
 
Positions and performance are displayed as a heat map, giving you a quick visual of your portfolio. You cannot consolidate holdings held outside eOption for a complete picture of your assets. Margin, buying power, and gains and losses are displayed in real-time; dividends and interest are updated overnight. Any advanced analysis will have to be done by downloading the data to Excel or by using another tool. 
 
The education available from eOption all focuses on options trading. There are webinars hosted by the Options Industry Council and traders from OptionsPlay available. There are articles from Hammerstone Research that discuss the options trading outlook. You won’t find life stage planning tools or other long-term calculators. As mentioned, if you want to check the platform out before opening an account, you can use their Paper Trading tool set for 60 days at no charge. Customers with funded accounts have unlimited use of the paper trading feature. 
 
eOption's security is up to industry standards:
