
Hedge funds have become a hot topic over the past decades as the number of funds has grown exponentially, while receiving increased media attention and attracting billions in investment dollars. While most people have a basic understanding of what they are, many investors are not familiar with the underlying types of hedge funds and their opaque risks.
 
(See also: 7 Hedge Fund Manager Startup Tips.)
 
While the hedge fund universe is wide, and often funds can fit into multiple categories, funds are generally classified as either equity-focused or fixed-income. (See also: Hedge Fund Investing.)
 
Beyond this very basic definition, funds can be broken down into any number of sub-categories, depending on their investment strategies. Some common fund types include:
 
Regardless of the type of hedge fund, there are numerous universal risks that basically every fund investor must take into careful consideration.
 
(For more, also check out: Quantitative Analysis of Hedge Funds.)
 
While every type of fund may have a different set of risks for its investors to consider, there are three basic types of risks which are shared by the entire hedge fund industry.
 
The biggest and most obvious risk is the risk of investors losing some or all of their investment. A key quality of hedge fund investment risk is the virtual Wild West landscape of the hedge fund industry (though strides have been made since the 2008 financial crisis). Fund managers for the most part have free reign over the investment decisions they make in chasing alpha with their portfolios. Unlike many other types of institutions, hedge funds are not regulated. While a fund may be tagged as a global blue-chip equity fund, and in most respects would be considered a relatively "safe" hedge fund investment, the strategies implemented by fund management, such as the use of excessive leverage, can create levels of investment risk not expected by investors.
 
Some specific types of investment risk include:
 
The risk of fraud is more prevalent in the hedge fund industry compared to mutual funds, due to the lack of regulation for the former. Hedge funds do not face the same stringent reporting standards as other funds, and therefore the risk of unethical behavior on the part of the fund and its employees is heightened. There have been numerous media reports of hedge fund managers who have bilked investors out of huge sums of money in order to lead lavish lifestyles or cover up constant losses for the fund. Knowing your hedge-fund manager and staying abreast of the literature provided to you by the fund are keys to protecting yourself from investment fraud.
 
Lastly, operational risk refers to the shortcomings of the policies, procedures and activities of a hedge fund and its employees. For example, quite often hedge funds deal in the over-the-counter market, where positions can be tailor-made to suit the needs of the involved parties. The biggest issue with OTC securities is in valuing them on an ongoing basis, since they are not publicly traded and very illiquid. This issue came to light in the early stages of the 2008 credit crisis, when, seemingly, no two institutions were able to accurately value the mortgages and asset-backed securities that had flooded the marketplace in the early 2000s. The very nature of the hedge-fund industry creates operational inefficiencies, and thus operational risks.
 
By being able to recognize the type of hedge fund along with its strategy, you should be able to identify potential risks associated with the fund. It's clear that the hedge-fund industry will only continue to grow, and having a strong grasp on what moves the industry will put you in a position of strength going forward.
 
(For more, see: Hedge Fund Due Diligence.)
