
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) have come a long way since the first U.S. fund, Standard & Poor's Depositary Receipts, better known as spiders (SPDRs), was launched back in 1993. This ETF tracks the S&P 500 and its popularity with investors led to the introduction of ETFs based on other benchmark U.S. equity indexes, such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq 100. (For more, see our subject-matter tutorial: Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) Investing.)
 
From their early beginnings as equity-index trackers, ETFs have grown to encompass a huge array of investment choices, but they aren't all equal in quality. In fact, the flip side to the phenomenal growth in ETFs is that it increases the risk that some of them will be liquidated, primarily due to lack of investor interest. How can you find a profitable ETF to fit your portfolio?
 
The wide array of choices in the ETFs space exist. These include traditional index ETFs based on U.S. and international equity indexes and subindexes, but also those that track benchmark indices in bonds, commodities and futures. There are ETFs based on investing style (value, growth or a combination thereof) and that segregate by market capitalization. You will also find leveraged ETFs that provide multiples in return (or loss) based on the underlying index's movements, or inverse ETFs that rise when the market falls and vice-versa.
 
According to Morningstar there are currently around 2,000 ETFs listed on US exchanges, and more than 5,000 around the globe. The combined assets managed by these funds exceed $2 trillion.
 
As an investor, the first thing you need to do is narrow down this enormous universe of ETFs and focus on just those that will suit your portfolio and long-term investment strategy. There are many ways to do this, but you can start with an asset screener that will filter out anything you don't want - like those leveraged or inverse ETFs perhaps. Even after you've settled on the types of ETFs you want and the general asset classes or indexes that you want to track, you still have some work to do.
 
The ETF market has become an intensely competitive environment. This has generally been positive for investors, as it has driven the fees associated with ETFs down toward zero - making them extremely low-cost and efficient securities. But that can also leave investors confused - for instance, if you want an ETF that tracks the S&P 500 index, you can go for the original SPDR (SPY). But there is also a Vanguard S&P 500 ETF, and a Schwab S&P 500 ETF, and an iShares S&P 500 ETF. In fact, there are at least a dozen S&P 500 ETFs listed on major U.S. stock exchanges.
 
In a bid to differentiate themselves from the competition, some ETF issuers have developed products that are either very specific in focus or are based on an investment trend that may be short lived. An example of a niche ETF is the Loncar Cancer Immunotherapy ETF (CNCR). This esoteric ETF tracks the Loncar Cancer Immunotherapy Index and invests in 31 stocks that focus on research and development of drugs and technology to fight cancer using immunotherapy.
 
As for ETFs that are based on hot investment trends, examples include the recently launched Robotics & Artificial Intelligence Thematic ETF (BOTZ) or the Drone Economy Strategy ETF (IFLY). There's even one called the Obesity ETF (SLIM) that invests in companies in the business of fighting obesity or obesity-related diseases. (See: The Weirdest Smart Beta ETFs.)
 
Given the bewildering number of ETF choices that investors now have to contend with, it's important to consider the following factors:
 
The closing, or liquidation, of an ETF is usually an orderly process. The ETF issuer will notify investors, generally three to four weeks in advance, about the date when the ETF will stop trading. That said, an investor with a position in an ETF that is being liquidated still has to decide on the best course of action in order to protect his or her investment. Essentially, the investor has to make one of the following choices:
 
Regardless of the course of action, the investor will have to contend with the issue of taxes arising from the liquidation of the ETF investment. For example, if the ETF was held in a taxable account, the investor will be responsible for paying taxes on any capital gains.
 
When selecting an ETF, investors should consider factors such as its level of assets, trading volume and underlying index. In the event that an ETF is to be liquidated, an investor has to decide whether to sell the ETF shares before it stops trading or wait until the liquidation process is completed, with due consideration given to the tax aspects of the ETF sale. 
