
Contrary to common belief, insider trading is not always illegal. Insider trading is legal when corporate insiders – such as a company's directors, officers, and employees – buy or sell shares in their company in accordance with securities laws and regulations. Such legal insider trading must be filed with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on certain forms within stipulated time periods.
 
The version of insider trading that makes the headlines, however, is the illegal trading made by someone who possesses material and nonpublic information. The SEC vigorously pursues such insider trading cases in order to ensure that the capital market is a level playing field where no one has an unfair advantage. Otherwise, rampant insider trading can erode public confidence in the market and impede its functioning. The SEC's successful cases against high-profile individuals like Martha Stewart and former McKinsey global head Rajat Gupta prove that no one is above the law if they undertake such illegal activity. As questions are raised about the sale of shares by Intel (INTC) CEO Brian Krzanich in the light of vulnerabilities discovered in the company's chips, here's a look at what insider trading is and how the stock regulator keeps a check on it.
 
The SEC defines illegal insider trading as "buying or selling a security, in breach of a fiduciary duty or other relationship of trust and confidence, while in possession of material, nonpublic information about the security." The SEC goes on to clarify that insider trading violations may also include "tipping" such information, securities trading by the person "tipped," and trading by those who misappropriate such information.
 
What is material information anyway? While there is no precise definition, “material information” may be broadly defined as any information specific to a company that would be considered important enough by an investor who is thinking of buying or selling the stock. This could include a vast array of items, including financial results that differ from current expectations, business developments, security-related items such as an increase or decrease in dividend, share split, or buyback; acquisition or divestiture; winning or losing a major contract or customer. “Nonpublic information” refers to information that has not yet been released to the investing public.
 
Over the years, the SEC has brought insider-trading cases against hundreds of parties, including
 
In a September 1998 speech titled "Insider Trading – A US Perspective" by Thomas Newkirk and Melissa Robertson of the SEC's Division of Enforcement, Newkirk, and Robertson pointed out that insider trading is a very difficult crime to prove. They noted that since direct evidence of insider trading is rare, the evidence is almost completely circumstantial.
 
The SEC tracks insider trading in a number of ways:
 
Such surveillance activity is helped by the fact that most insider trades are conducted with the intention of "hitting it out of the ballpark." That is to say, an insider who is indulging in illegal trading typically wants to rake in as much as possible, rather than settling for a small score. Such huge, anomalous trades are usually flagged as suspicious and may trigger an SEC investigation.
 
The easiest way for someone to capitalize on inside information is through the use of OTM options since these deliver the most bang for the buck. Let's say you had $100,000 to invest in a nefarious trading scheme and were tipped about an imminent takeover offer for a biotech stock that is currently trading at $12. Your source, a high-level executive at the potential acquirer, tells you that the offer for the target will be $20 in cash. Now you could immediately buy 8,333 shares of the target company at $12, sell it at about $20 once the deal is announced, and pocket a cool profit of $66,664 for a 60% return. But since you want to maximize your gains, you buy 2,000 contracts of one-month calls on the target company with a strike price of $15 for $0.50 each (each contract costs $0.50 x 100 shares = $50). When the deal is announced, these calls will soar to $5 (i.e., $20 – $15), making each contract worth $500, for a 10-fold gain. The 2,000 contracts would be worth a cool $1 million, and the gain on this trade would be $900,000.
 
The traders, who wrote the calls that you purchased at $0.50, did so unaware that you possessed inside information that could be used for your pecuniary benefit and to their detriment. Would it be any surprise if they complained about the suspicious nature of this trade, which has saddled them with a gigantic loss to the SEC?
 
Tips about insider trading may also come from whistleblowers who can collect between 10% and 30% of the money collected from those who break securities laws. However, because insider trading is typically done on a one-off basis by a single insider who may either trade directly or tip someone else, whistleblowers seem to be more successful in unearthing widespread fraud rather than isolated insider trading abuses.
 
Once the SEC has the basic facts on a possible securities violation, its Division of Enforcement launches a full investigation that is conducted privately. The SEC develops a case by interviewing witnesses, examining trading records and data, subpoenaing phone records, etc. In recent years, the SEC has employed a bigger arsenal of tools and techniques to combat insider trading. In the landmark Galleon Group case, for instance, it used wiretaps for the first time to implicate a number of people in a wide-ranging insider-trading ring.
 
As the evidence in an insider trading case is largely circumstantial, SEC staff has to establish a chain of events and fit together pieces of evidence, much like a jigsaw puzzle. A case brought by the SEC against a consulting executive and his friend in September 2011 illustrates this point. The executive passed on confidential information he had learned about the impending takeovers of two biotechnology companies to his friend, who bought a large number of call options on these companies. The insider trading generated illicit profits of $2.6 million, and the executive received cash from his friend in exchange for the tips. The SEC alleged that the two communicated about the potential takeovers during in-person meetings and on the phone. Some of these meetings were tracked through the two perpetrators' use of MetroCards at New York subway stations and large cash withdrawals from ATMs and banks made by the executive's friend before their meetings.
 
Following an insider trading investigation, the staff presents their findings to the SEC for review, which can authorize staff to bring an administrative action or file a case in federal court. In a civil action, the SEC files a complaint with a US District Court and seeks a sanction or injunction against the individual that prohibits any further acts that violate securities law, plus civil monetary penalties and disgorgement of illegal profits. In an administrative action, the proceedings are heard by an administrative law judge who issues an initial decision that includes findings of fact and legal conclusions. Administrative sanctions include cease and desist orders, suspension or revocation of financial industry registrations, censures, civil monetary penalties, and disgorgement.
 
While the 1980s was the decade of massive insider trading scandals by the likes of Ivan Boesky, Dennis Levine, and Michael Milken, two of the biggest insider trading cases in this Millennium include:
 
Insider trading in the US is a crime that is punishable by monetary penalties and incarceration, with a maximum prison sentence for an insider trading violation of 20 years and a maximum criminal fine for individuals of $5 million. Although US penalties for insider trading are among the stiffest in the world, the number of cases filed by the SEC in recent years shows that the practice may be impossible to stamp out entirely.
