
Computer software can be considered a long-term asset that falls under fixed assets like buildings and land.﻿﻿ However, there are times when software should not be considered a long-term asset. In this article, we'll review the accounting standards that are in place to classify computer software.
 
Intangible assets are typically nonphysical assets used over the long-term. Intangible assets are often intellectual assets, and as a result, it's difficult to assign a value to them because of the uncertainty of future benefits.﻿﻿
 
On the other hand, tangible assets are physical and measurable assets that are used in a company's operations. Assets like property, plant, and equipment (PP&E) are tangible assets.﻿﻿
 
PP&E refers to long-term assets, such as equipment that is vital to a company's operations and has a definite physical component.﻿﻿ Under most circumstances, computer software is classified as an intangible asset because of its nonphysical nature. However, accounting rules state that there are certain exceptions that permit the classification of computer software, such as PP&E (property, plant, and equipment).
 
Below are the accounting standards that describe how and when computer software should be classified as PP&E:
 
It's important that we first define the accounting standard for property, plant, & equipment, better known by its acronym: PP&E. According to SFFAS No. 6, tangible assets are classified as PP&E if:
 
There are rules that are applied to determine whether or not software must be capitalized as PP&E or expensed. If the software meets the criteria of property, plant, and equipment as stated above, it can be classified as PP&E. According to SFFAS No. 10:
 
It's important to review the financial accounting standards before making any decisions on whether to expense or capitalize on computer software as PP&E. This article only touches on a few of the key topics. Many other instances may have different accounting standards that might need to be applied such as cloud computing, multi-use software, developmental software, and shared software between divisions.
 Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 946 (2019), How To Depreciate Property." Accessed April 13, 2020. International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation (IFRS). "IAS 38 Intangible Assets." Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation (IFRS). "IAS 16 Property, Plant and Equipment." Accessed March 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 10: Accounting for Internal Use Software," Page 1. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Governmental Accounting Standards Board. "Statement No. 51 of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board: Accounting and Financial Reporting for Intangible Assets," Page i. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 6: Accounting for Property, Plant, and Equipment," Page 2. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 10: Accounting for Internal Use Software," Page 8. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 10: Accounting for Internal Use Software," Page 23. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 10: Accounting for Internal Use Software," Pages 9-10, 12. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 10: Accounting for Internal Use Software," Page 16. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020. Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. "Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 10: Accounting for Internal Use Software," Page 9. Accessed Mar. 27, 2020.