
What does it cost to trade bitcoin? Apart from the price of bitcoin itself, each cryptocurrency exchange adds a fee for trading, when customers purchase and sell coins. These fees include Maker (which add to the order book liquidity through limit orders) and Taker (which subtract liquidity from an order book through market orders) fees. In some cases, cryptocurrency traders can incur maker as well as trader fees, if the limit order is already present in the order book. 
 
Cryptocurrency exchanges mainly calculate fees in two ways: as a flat fee per trade or as a percentage of the 30-day trading volume for an account. In both cases, they’ve adopted a tiered structure that depends on the amount being traded. 
 
There are four important things that traders must consider while purchasing cryptocurrencies.
 
Here is a brief comparison of trading fees for bitcoin at the current list of most popular exchanges by trade volume. This comparison does not take into account margin and leverage fees. 
 
Seychelles-based HCoin is one of the newest entrants into the cryptocurrency exchange field as of January 2020. Launched in August 2018, HCoin offers customers the opportunity to trade in a list of cryptocurrencies and fiat currencies including bitcoin, ether, XRP, litecoin, bitcoin cash, EOS, USDT, and HKDT, among many others.
 
HCoin's fees are dependent on the base currency and volume and are listed in a chart on the exchange's website.﻿﻿ The company does not appear to list any fees for funding an account through transfer of digital assets from another wallet, nor is it clear whether the transaction fees change depending upon the size of each trade.
 
Estonian platform Coinsbit has a focus on security and on innovative offerings such as InvestBox, a low-cost, low-risk way for investors to make exploratory transactions involving new altcoins.﻿﻿ When it comes to fees, Coinsbit charges a flat 0.2% fee for trading. The exchange also has variable fees for deposit and withdrawal, depending upon the cryptocurrency, and with different minimums for each token as well. As of January 11, 2020, the fee to deposit USD was 0.8% and the fee to withdraw USD was 0.4%. Some of the cryptocurrencies are free to deposit (i.e. ETH, ARK, ATB, and others), and others are free to withdraw.﻿﻿
 
Additionally, new accounts are initially prohibited from making withdrawals. Later, basic accounts have a withdrawal limit of USD$500 or equivalent per 24-hour period, while enhanced accounts can withdraw up to USD$100,000 or equivalent in a 24-hour span.
 
The third most popular cryptocurrency exchange by trade volume is BitForex, an exchange headquartered in Singapore and registered in Seychelles. BitForex offers a host of trading options, including margin trading, derivatives, and more. As such, this exchange has a more complex fee schedule than some of its peers on this list.
 
For spot trades, BitForex charges 0.1% for both maker and taker feeds. For perpetual trades, there is a maker fee of 0.04% and a taker fee of 0.06%. Discounted rates are available for specialized market maker accounts on the platform. Deposits to BitForex are free, while withdrawals vary depending upon the currency involved. There are also minimum and 24-hour maximum withdrawal levels associated with each cryptocurrency.﻿﻿
 
Besides being a popular cryptocurrency exchange, LBank also supports innovation in the altcoin space through its "LBK Voting Listing" event, which pits 8 new cryptocurrency projects against one another for a chance to be listed on LBank for free.
 
LBank charges a taker fee of 0.2% and a maker fee of -0.05%, meaning that makers earn a portion of the generated trade fee on the transaction. Different cryptocurrencies are associated with various withdrawal rates set at fixed quantities of those cryptocurrencies themselves. For instance, a user withdrawing bitcoin from LBank will be charged a flat fee of 0.0005 BTC. There are also withdrawal minimums for each cryptocurrency that are also set as fixed quantities of the token in question. Interestingly, LBank does not indicate a maximum withdrawal over a 24-hour period.﻿﻿
 
Including one of the most extensive lists of trading pairs, with more than 700 possible combinations P2PB2B regularly sees daily trade volumes close to $1 billion. Like Coinsbit, P2PB2B charges a flat 0.2% fee for trades. Users can deposit most cryptocurrencies, including BTC and ETH, for free. However, there is a charge of either 4% or 5% (with a minimum of either USD$5 or USD$10) to deposit USD into an account, depending upon the method of deposit. P2PB2B also sets minimum deposits and withdrawals in most cases and charges a variable withdrawal fee depending upon the cryptocurrency. Like LBank, withdrawal fees vary from token to token but are assessed as fixed quantities of tokens.﻿﻿
 CoinDesk. "China Is Poised for Another Crypto Trading Crackdown as Speculative Fever Returns," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. Coinbase. "Price," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. HCoin. "Rate," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. Coinsbit. "InvestBox," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. Coinsbit. "Fee Schedule," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. BitForex. "Trading Fees," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. LBank. "Fees," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020. P2PB2B. "Fee Schedule," Accessed Jan. 11, 2020.