
The eurobond is a type of bond that is issued in a currency that is different from that of the country or market in which it is issued. Despite its name, it has no particular connection to Europe or the euro currency.
 
Due to this external currency characteristic, these types of bonds are also known as external bonds.
 
The "euro" in eurobond is meant to imply external. These eurobonds should not be confused with Eurobonds with a capital "E." When capitalized, the word defines bonds issued by the European Union and European governments. 
 
The names of eurobonds (small "e") reflect the currency in which they are denominated. For example, a U.K.-based company might issue a U.S. dollar-denominated eurodollar bond in Japan. Or, an international financial syndicate could issue euroyen bonds in Singapore, which are denominated in Japanese yen.
 
Private organizations, international syndicates, and even governments in need of foreign-denominated money for a specified length of time find eurobonds suitable to their needs. Eurobonds are usually offered at fixed interest rates, even if they are issued for long periods of time.
 
For example, say a company like Molson Coors wants to enter a new market by establishing a manufacturing facility in India. Expenses for the facility will require a large amount of capital in the local currency, the Indian rupee (INR).
 
As it is new to India, the company may not have the necessary credit in the Indian markets, which can lead to a high cost for borrowing locally. Molson Coors decides to source the money locally and issues a rupee-denominated eurobond in the U.S. Investors with Indian rupees in their U.S.-based accounts may purchase the bond, effectively loaning money in Indian rupees to the company.
 The eurobond is denominated in a foreign currency but launched in a nation with a strong currency. That keeps them highly liquid for their investors. 
The North American company collects this capital and floats a subsidiary company locally in India. The collected capital, in rupees, is transferred to the local Indian subsidiary by the parent company. The plant becomes operational, and the proceeds are used to pay the interest to bondholders.
 
There are a number of benefits to issuing eurobonds rather than domestic bonds for a project of this type:
 
For the investor, eurobonds can offer diversification with a smaller degree of risk. They are investing in a solid and familiar local company that is expanding its business into an emerging market.
 
Also, eurobonds are denominated in foreign currencies but launched in nations with strong currencies. That keeps them highly liquid for their local investors.
 
For example, an Indian rupee eurodollar bond issued in the U.K. with par value of 10,000 Indian rupees will cost a U.K. investor the equivalent of about 104 British pounds at the prevailing exchange rate.
