
Hyperledger is a global enterprise blockchain project that offers the necessary framework, standards, guidelines and tools, to build open source blockchains and related applications for use across various industries. Hyperledger's projects include a variety of enterprise-ready permissioned blockchain platforms, where network participants are known to one another and therefore have an intrinsic interest in participating in the consensus making process.
 
Using the available components under the Hypeledger umbrella, a business can apply various modular blockchain solutions and services to significantly improve the performance of their operations and the efficiency of their business processes.
 
The Hyperledger project was created in December 2015 by the San Francisco, California-based Linux Foundation. It started with 10 member firms, and has grown to more than 100 member companies today.
 
Hyperledger was set up with the aim of accelerating industry-wide collaboration for developing high performance and reliable blockchain and distributed ledger-based technology framework, that could be used across the various industry sectors to enhance the efficiency, performance and transactions of the various business processes.
 
Hyperledger is a global collaboration that includes leading businesses from the fields of finance, banking, Internet of Things (IoT), supply chain management, manufacturing and production, and technology. They include big names like Airbus, Daimler, IBM, Samsung, Nokia, Deutsche Börse, American Express, JP Morgan and Well Fargo, in addition to a host of blockchain-based startups like Blockstream and Cosensys.
 
Essentially, Hyperledger is not an organization, a cryptocurrency network, or a blockchain system. It does not support a cryptocurrency like bitcoin, but it works by providing the necessary infrastructure and standards for developing various blockchain-based systems and applications for industrial use. Think of Hyperledger as a hub, where various individual blockchain-based projects and tools that adhere to its defined design philosophy operate under its umbrella.
 
The various projects include among the following:
 
All such projects under the Hyperledger umbrella follow the design methodology that supports a modular and extensible approach, interoperability, and security features. The projects remain agnostic to a particular token or cryptocurrency, though a user can create one as required.
 
In terms of the architecture, Hyperledger uses the following key business components:
