
"Billions" is back! The hit series from CBS's Showtime network is back with season 5 debuting on May 3, 2020, and the intrigue is intoxicating.﻿﻿ The show, which debuted in 2016 as the brainchild of veteran TV writers Bryan Koppelman and David Levien, takes us deep into the opulent and cutthroat world of hedge funds, white collar criminals, and prosecutors willing to cross the line to catch a whale.﻿﻿
 
The series follows billionaire hedge fund king Bobby Axelrod (Damian Lewis from the hit "Homeland"﻿﻿ ), the show’s main protagonist, and founder of Axe Capital, on is endless pursuit of an edge to tilt the capital markets in his favor. For the first three seasons, Axe, as he is called, is relentlessly pursued by U.S. Attorney Chuck Rhoades (Paul Giamatti, of "Sideways and "John Adams" fame﻿﻿ ). Rhoades' wife, Dr. Wendy Rhoades (Maggie Siff﻿﻿ ) just happens to be Axe Capital's in-house psychologist, which, to say the least, complicates matters.
 
In Season 3, Axe is forced to step away from his firm as part of an agreement with the government after being charged with insider trading and market manipulation. Axe finds it impossible to stay out of the game despite putting his firm in the hands of trading savant Taylor Mason (Asia Kate Dillon﻿﻿﻿). Meanwhile, Chuck Rhoades—whose wife, Wendy, is still working as the in-house psychologist to both Axe and his firm—remains intent on prosecuting the billionaire, albeit from a distance, after handing the case over to the Eastern District of New York and his hand-picked U.S. Attorney, Oliver Dake (Christopher Denham﻿﻿﻿).
 
By the end of season 3, Axe and Rhoades, who have both been crossed by their former lieutenants, are about to join forces to enact revenge. If the past three seasons have taught us anything, there will be treachery, deceit, avarice, suspense, and billions. Lots of them.
 
"Billions" exposes viewers to the genius and, as some would have it, dirty tricks, of hedge fund managers who weave their portfolio trading strategies around financial regulators, insider trading, corporate actions, and more. It also tracks the relentless pursuit of these hedge fund titans by U.S. attorneys, who sometimes bend the law themselves in order to gain an edge and win their cases.
 
The show is laden with investing and financial terminology, which makes it irresistible for us. It offers a fascinating look into the way financial markets work at the extremes, and how the system is played by its richest participants. We don't want you to miss any of the nuances of the plot, so here is a glossary to keep you up to speed:
 Showtime. "Billions." Accessed April 5, 2020. IMDb. "Billions." Accessed April 5, 2020. IMDb. "Damian Lewis." Accessed April 5, 2020. IMDb. "Paul Giamatti." Accessed April 5, 2020. IMDb. "Maggie Siff." Accessed April 5, 2020. IMDb. "Asia Kate Dillon." Accessed April 5, 2020. IMDb. "Christopher Denham." Accessed April 5, 2020.