
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
We are excited to announce the winners of our 2019 Best Robo-Advisor Awards!
 
At Investopedia, our mission is to simplify complex financial information and decisions for our readers, giving them the confidence to manage every aspect of their financial life. Helping investors find the right tools and platforms to invest with is key to that mission. With so many options available, our team evaluated more than 30 robo-advisor platforms using our robust methodology.
 
Once a year we hand out awards to showcase the robo-advisors that have demonstrated excellence across five different categories that cover the different needs that investors have.
 
Here are our winners for 2019.
 Our list of the top robo-advisors represent the best-in-industry platforms that offer solutions for investors at all levels. See our full list of the Best Robo-Advisors. Winners in this category offered the most guidance and education to users throughout the process of opening an account to funding and managing it. We favored those platforms with lower minimum deposits to create an easy starting point for new investors with fewer assets. See our full list of the Best Robo-Advisors For Beginners. While robo-advisors are generally geared towards those who are looking for more of a hands-off investing experience, there are several that provide the ability to have more command and control over your investments. In this category, we favored those that offered customizable portfolios, the ability to invest in individual stocks, deeper insights into portfolios prior to funding, and tax-advantaged features. We also looked at each robo-advisor’s research tools, as well as more advanced account services such as the ability to take out a loan backed by the investor’s portfolio balance. See our full list of the Best Robo-Advisors For Sophisticated Investors.