
When we started our 2020 online broker reviews in the fall of 2019, we obviously had no idea about how our world would change. We recognize that we all are living through a particularly sensitive time as we deal with this global crisis, and financial markets have been hit particularly hard, impacting all investors. Our mission has always been to help people make the best and most informed decisions they can about how, when, and where to invest. Given recent market volatility, and the changes in the online brokerage industry, we are more committed than ever to providing our readers with unbiased and expert reviews of the top investing platforms for investors of all levels, for every kind of market.
 
To that end, we’ve designed an extensive ranking methodology to find the best online brokers.
 
Our review team is led by Theresa W. Carey, who wrote the first-ever review of online brokers in 1992, and has been an authority in online trading and investing platforms for nearly three decades. James Chen is our Director of Trading and Investing Education. Luke Conway is our Associate Editor. Our team of expert reviewers includes veteran traders, financial market experts, investing educators, and researchers with decades of experience, who are all adept at using and reviewing financial technology.
 
We designed a system that rates brokers based on 12 key categories and 103 variables. Each category encapsulates the critical elements users need to thoroughly evaluate an online broker.
 
To collect the data, we sent questionnaires with 320 queries to the participating brokers. We obtained a live brokerage account for each platform and used the account to perform hands-on tests for each broker. Many of the brokers we reviewed gave us in-person demonstrations of their platforms and services at our offices in New York.
 
From the questionnaires, the hands-on testing of the broker platforms, and the demonstrations, we score each evaluation category and combine the category scores into an overall rating for each broker.
 
We believed our hands-on testing had to represent how real investors and traders truly use these platforms. We realized early on that one trader is quite different from the next. 
 
To solve this, we tested each broker on a series of investor personas. Our personas included the Passive Investor, the Active Investor, the Casual Trader, and the Day Trader. Each broker was put through four different trading and investing scenarios based on the different profiles we created. 
 
Testing the brokers on these four levels gave us significant insight into how these brokers would apply to different types of investors, ranging from the beginner all the way to the more advanced day trader. This allowed us to more accurately recommend brokerages to the right users.
 
With the individual retail investor in mind, we took a critical look at the services and technology provided by online brokers. We organized our analysis into 12 categories, scoring each broker for its performance in each category.
 
Each investor has different needs. New investors need an online broker with an easy to use platform and educational resources, whereas an options trader needs risk analysis tools and ways to model various strategies. In addition to our overall rankings, we provide rankings for ten trading and investing styles. In each case, we use the same data and re-weight the features that matter most for that style. The exact details of the re-weighting are provided on each of the category awards.
 
The order types category is evaluated based on the types of orders customers can place using a brokerage platform. For this category, we looked for less common types of orders that can be useful for the inexperienced, up to advanced investors and traders. We also looked at whether these order types were available across mobile, web, and desktop software platforms. 
 
Higher scores in this section included the following order types across each of a broker’s platforms:
 
This category evaluates the overall workflow for placing an order. A primary emphasis in this category is a workflow that progresses logically from one step to the next. We checked out the ways a trader is told that an order is executed, such as pop-up notices, an order status update, and/or a text on a mobile device when the order fills. 
 
To score this section we documented our experience using the platform in ways they would be commonly used by different investor types. This category focused on the ways users can customize their experience throughout the various platforms that a broker offers. 
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
This category primarily evaluates what goes on after the trader submits an order and also addresses pre- and post-trade data.
 
We evaluated the quality of the data available during the order entry process with an emphasis on streaming real-time data. The availability of price-improvement strategies and smart-order routing technology (which finds the best bid or offer) is necessary to earn top ratings in this category. We asked whether a broker’s order routing engine used a spray or sequential engine; spray routing contacts multiple venues simultaneously and is less inclined to execute orders via routes that offer payment for order flow. Brokers offering price improvement—a sale above the bid price or a buy below the offer price—received a fraction of a point depending on the portion of their transactions that benefited.
 
Top marks in this category require that a broker offer:
 
While the trade experience evaluates the workflow process of trading and investing, this category specifically evaluates the overall site navigation and ease of use.
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
This category evaluates the extent of asset classes a brokerage customer can trade online.
 
We awarded points for the diversity of investments that can be traded online, with partial points given for those that can only be traded by calling a live broker. Since long and short stock trading, as well as single-leg options orders, are now standard, we don’t award points for those transactions.
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
This category evaluates the quality and accessibility of research, quotes, and charting.
 
We looked for research, news and charting linked to a customer’s portfolio and watch lists, quality of proprietary and third-party research and its integration with the rest of the site, and the quality of screeners.
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
This category evaluates the process a customer goes through when something goes wrong, or when a customer needs some additional hand-holding.
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
This category evaluates the educational offerings that brokers have so that their clients can become more advanced.
 
Top marks in this category require:
 
This category evaluates the bottom line for using a broker’s platforms and services.
 
This year we have updated our methodology to reflect what has become industry standard—Commission-free equity trading. This means that brokers who still charge a commission on equity trades fall behind. 
 
Full credit in this category can be earned by:
 
The pressure of zero fees has changed the business model for most online brokers. In lieu of fees, the way brokers make money from you is less obvious—as are some of the subtle ways they make money for you. 
 
This category was gauged based on the broker’s security features and how the level of commitment the broker shows in keeping its client’s sensitive information secure. 
