
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Investopedia is dedicated to providing investors with unbiased, comprehensive reviews and ratings of financial products and technology. Since 2009, when mobile apps became mainstream, robo-advisors have become an important part of the investing and financial technology ecosystem and are becoming widely used. But not all robo-advisors offer the same services or cater to the same types of customers. Some are designed for active investors, while others are targeting customers who are looking to manage their finances, savings, and family budgets. This year we added a focus on cash management tools that about half of the firms have added to their services. There is no yield anywhere this year, so how robo-advisors help you with cash management is even more important this year. In addition, we made the fees ratings more granular.
 
We are committed to helping users at all levels find the right robo-advisor for their needs. To that end, we’ve designed a comprehensive ranking methodology to find the best overall robo-advisors and the best robo-advisors across four key categories.
 
Our review team is led by Theresa W. Carey, who wrote the first-ever review of online brokers in 1992, and has been an authority on online trading and investing platforms for over 28 years. James Chen is our Director of Trading and Investing Education. Luke Conway is our Associate Editor. Our team of expert reviewers includes veteran traders, financial market experts, investing educators, and researchers with decades of experience, who are all adept at using and reviewing financial technology.
 
We designed a system that rates robo-advisors based on nine key categories and 51 variables. Each category covers the critical elements users need to thoroughly evaluate a robo-advisor.
 
To evaluate these platforms, we sent questionnaires with over 100 queries to the participating robo-advisories. Most of the companies we reviewed gave us socially-distanced video demonstrations of their platforms and services during August 2020.
 
From the questionnaires, the hands-on testing of the platforms, and the platform demonstrations, we scored each category and then combined the category scores into an overall rating for each robo-advisor. Each category covers the critical elements users need to thoroughly evaluate a robo-advisor.
 
With the individual investor in mind, we took a critical look at the services and technology provided by robo-advisors. We organized our analysis into nine categories, scoring each advisor across multiple variables to rate performance in every applicable category. The score for the overall award is a weighted average of the categories.
 
Each investor has different needs. Beginners need a robo platform with an easy-to-use interface and educational resources, whereas more advanced users need risk analysis tools, trading platforms, portfolio management, and more goals-based options. 
 
We learned during our review process that there are two types of firms offering automated portfolios. For regulatory and legal reasons, their services differ considerably. Firms registered as investment advisers are allowed to help their clients determine goals and can offer specific and directed advice. Firms registered as broker-dealers are restricted from offering targeted advice, but they have more flexibility in terms of offering features such as customizable investment choices and margin lending.  
 
We have chosen to exclude portfolio performance from our review criteria for several reasons. The main reason is that every customer has specific, individualized goals when it comes to investing through a robo-advisor. Some look for a more conservative approach, while others seek aggressive growth. In addition, all investors have different start dates and end dates. Since these services are designed to be used over a very long period of time, ranking their performance against benchmarks like the S&P 500 or the MSCI All World Index over a time frame like a single year or even over three years misses the personalization that these platforms offer.
 
Another reason is that each of the providers has, on average, more than 20 portfolios available, and several providers have ways to customize portfolios so that the possibilities are endless. It’s impossible to compare apples to apples. We have chosen, instead, to focus on the overall experience of using one of these providers. As such, we hone in on how you can plan for and set goals, as well as how transparent each robo-advisory service is when presenting information to clients. 
 
Since clients use robo-advisors for financial planning, investing, and tracking their goals, we also ranked the various platforms for their strengths and weaknesses across the following categories:
 
This category gauges the level of simplicity in the sign-up process as well as the transparency of the firm’s offerings and fees. 
 
In the modern age of investing, a simple and easy on-ramp is necessary to interest new and younger clients, especially for robo-advisors, who are working to break out of the status quo and existing standards.
 
With this in mind, we found it important to assess the following aspects of robo-advisor platforms in our account setup category:
 
The goal-setting category grades the extent to which you can define and track your investing goals. 
 
Robo-advisors are designed to meet many different investors’ needs. While some may just want to beat the market and potentially make some money, others are looking to meet more specific needs. Robo-advisors who provide their clients with features that help set, plan for, and track goals scored well in this category.
 
To score robo-advisors based on these features we took into account the following features:
 
Our account services category gauges the quantity and quality of the services that each platform offers.
 
There are a lot of robo-advisors in the industry. Some try to cover it all and some try to cover specific use cases. In this category, while it may be beneficial to have lots of features, this only really matters if the features are of high quality. 
 
Access to the following features is how we based scores in this category:
 
This section of our methodology determines what types of asset classes in which clients can invest. Since all of the robo-advisors offer exchange-traded funds (ETFs), we considered whether clients could invest in other asset types as well. 
 
An ever-changing landscape of financial asset classes creates pressure for brokerages and robo-advisors and forces them to consider offering these new options. As these new options come into play, such as socially responsible investing or cryptocurrencies, brokerages and robo-advisors must evaluate them and determine if they are worthwhile for their businesses and viable investments for their clients. We looked at the mutual funds and ETFs offered to determine whether each robo-advisory service was making a wide range of fund providers available, with higher scores awarded to those who offer non-proprietary funds.  
 
For our Portfolio Contents category, we looked to see if the following asset classes were available to clients:
 
This section weighs how portfolios are managed and the features available for clients to monitor their portfolios. Two actions that affect a portfolio’s performance are rebalancing and, for taxable accounts, tax management. We studied what triggers a portfolio rebalance and how frequently it happens. We also looked at whether tax loss harvesting is available and what account size is required to turn this feature on.
 
Understanding portfolio performance and progress towards goals is one of the key services that robo-advisors can provide, so we looked at the reports available and the advice given when progress falls short. Robo-advisors that provide built-in portfolio analysis reporting which includes assets held at other financial institutions help their clients understand their overall net worth, which is part of understanding overall performance.
 
To evaluate portfolio management we looked at the following features:
 
One of the most important features of robo-advisors is their ease of use. This is because robo-advisors, for the most part, are designed as an entry ramp to investing for the less experienced.
 
The following criteria were considered when grading user experience:
 
This category assesses the process a customer must go through when something goes wrong, or when a customer needs some additional assistance. Our research associate made calls to all of the firms reviewed at different times of day, recording how long it took before a live person was available, and the quality of the answers provided. 
 
Top marks in this category require the robo-advisor to give their clients access to the following methods of seeking help: 
 
This category evaluates what robo-advisors offer to educate their clients in an effort to get them more comfortable with investing and the markets as a whole. Here, we also take into account the security measures taken to keep their clients’ assets and information safe.
 
Top marks in this category require:
