
Apple Pay is a mobile payment system that was in use by close to 440 million people around the world as of September of 2019. Its growth rate can truly be described as explosive, since its reach was about 292 million only one year earlier, according to Statista.com.﻿﻿
 
As for whether it's safe or not, Apple Pay is certainly safer to use than cash. And, it should be safer to use than plastic, as long as the account owner enables its full safety features.
 
Apple Pay can be used to complete a transaction at any merchant, web retailer, or app that accepts it. In addition, it allows users to send and receive money from other users via messaging. (As of July of 2020, that feature was available only in the U.S.)﻿﻿
 
Each transaction incorporates a number of security measures:
 
Apple promises never to share card information across its cloud. While this means users have to manually enter their card information into each device, it adds to the security of the service.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Needless to say, Apple Pay and its competitors face a constant assault from hackers eager to scale its security walls. So far, these attempts appear to have uncovered vulnerabilities created by users but not by Apple.
 One report indicates that wi-fi hotspots may be used to intercept and reuse encrypted transaction data. 
One unconfirmed report claims that Apply Pay could make it easier to exploit stolen identities. That is, a criminal could simply load stolen information, including credit card numbers, into an iPhone and go on a shopping spree. (This actually would be the responsibility of the bank that issued the stolen card, not Apple.)﻿﻿
 
Another unconfirmed report claims that "white hat" hackers were able to infect a device with malware and then intercept payment data as it was entered by an iPhone user and sent to the Apple server. This could only be done on a "jailbroken" iPhone, meaning one with software that had been tampered with.﻿﻿
 
Yet another report claims that users of wi-fi hotspots are vulnerable to hackers who can intercept and reuse the cryptogram that is used to enable an Apple Pay transaction. Yes, the cryptogram is supposed to be usable only once, but apparently some merchants allow them to be used more than once. Another example of an error that exploits imperfect use of the Apple Pay system.﻿﻿
 Statista. "Number of Apple Pay users worldwide as of September 2019." Accessed July 9, 2020. Apple. "Apple Pay: Cashless made effortless." Accessed July 9, 2020. Apple. "Apple Pay security and privacy overview." Accessed July 9, 2020. Forbes. "Millions are Being Lost to Apple Pay Fraud—Will Apple Card Come tot he Rescue?" Accessed July 9, 2020. The Register. "Wallet-snatch hack Apple Pay 'vulnerable to attack,' claim researchers." Accessed July 9, 2020. Seeking Alpha. "Apple Pay Can Be Hacked." Accessed July 9, 2020.