
Leeds School of Business is located at the University of Colorado in Boulder, Colorado. It offers both undergraduate and graduate courses and awards degrees including a Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree program and a Ph.D program.
 
Leeds regularly ranks among the top 100 b-schools in the U.S. It ranked 70th in the 2021 ranking by U.S. News & World Report. It ranks 60th on the 2019 Forbes list of business schools.
 
Founded in 1906 as the University of Colorado’s College of Commerce, the college received its current name in October 2001 after a $35 million donation by the family of businessman and philanthropist Michael Leeds.
 
As part of this donation, the Leeds family mandated that all students at the Leeds School of Business receive meaningful training in social responsibility, business ethics, diversity and inclusion, and sustainability. An undergraduate student can earn a certificate in socially-responsible enterprise, while executive education students can study corporate social responsibility theory.
 
The school also embraces global commerce, with programs including internships abroad.
 
The school now has about 3,400 full-time undergraduates and about 200 MBA candidates enrolled.
 The Leeds School of Business is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). Of more than 16,000 degree-granting business schools in the world, fewer than 5% have earned AACSB accreditation. 
Today, the Leeds School offers undergraduate degrees in accounting, finance, marketing, and entrepreneurship. MBA programs include a full-time option as well as an evening MBA program designed for students already actively working. Classes on tax preparation are conducted jointly with the university's College of Law.
 
Master's degree programs are offered in real estate, business analytics, and supply chain management.
 
Due to the Leeds School's status as part of a public university system, tuition is somewhat lower than at many private business colleges. For the 2021 academic year, program costs were $52,362 for full-time in-state students and $64,125 for out-of-state students.
 
The median GMT score of students is 610, according to Forbes.
 
The college estimates that 53.9% of its graduates have a job on graduation. The average post-graduate salary as of 2018 was $100,000.
 
Historically, the Leeds School of Business MBA program has been an effective conduit for professionals seeking a career in accounting and other financial services disciplines, which in recent years have represented about 30% of the job placements of MBA graduates. Sales and marketing is another significant industry area, representing about 25% of job placements.
 
Alumni told Forbes they particularly prized the "360-degree entrepreneurial immersion" of its program. The school's proximity to the Colorado tech startup scene was cited as a bonus, not to mention its spectacular Rocky Mountains location.
