
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
The broker formerly known as Just2Trade announced in mid-Jan. 2020 that it changed its name and overall focus. Just2Trade was originally founded in 2007 as a deep discount broker with a focus on very active, high-volume traders. The new name, Score Priority, reflects the firm's vision of developing traders who commit themselves to successful investing.
 
In addition to the change in name and focus, Score Priority launched a commission-free Lite trading platform with a browser-based application and a mobile app. The company’s new brand identity, logo, and website are intended to more clearly represent the ecosystem and potential value to traders. These changes come at a time when the company is relaunching its service offerings and expanding its capabilities for active and institutional traders. We'll look at Score Priority's revamped offering to help you decide whether it is a good fit for your trading needs.
 
The newly launched and reformatted Score Priority is best suited for traders who are past the novice stage and on the way to becoming extremely active. More active traders who want access to stocks, options, futures, futures options, and international markets to create multi-instrument trades will likely see the most value in a Score Priority account.
 
This review focuses on Score Priority's features and fees for account holders in the United States. Investors outside the U.S. may choose to open an account with Score Priority’s Cyprus-registered sister company for access to spot forex and contracts for differences (CFDs), in addition to the other instruments provided by the U.S. firm.
 You can connect the Score Priority trading engine to a third-party application for more powerful analytics The per-share and per-contract pricing tables reward high-volume traders with very low commissions Customers can qualify for up to three months of free access to Trade Ideas, a third-party site offering a suite of scanning and advanced analysis tools The services and research offered on the Lite (zero commission) website are very limited A minimum account balance of $2,000 is required and inactive accounts incur fees The order routing system does not seek out price improvement 
Score Priority does well in terms of accessibility and ease of use. Setting up an account via the online opening process is easy and quick. The account registration forms provide guidance for the required responses if you want approval to use your brokerage account to trade on margin or to engage in advanced options strategies. You must fund your account with a minimum of $2,000 before you can place any trades ($50,000 to avoid inactivity fees if you trade less than five times per quarter). 
 
There are three web-based platforms available to Score Priority clients: Lite, Plus, and Pro. The Pro platform has charting and some analytical tools beyond what you will get with the other two. Once the account is set up, you log right into Score Priority Lite, but you’ll have to log in again to use the Plus or Pro platform. The entry-level Lite platform is easy to navigate, and order tickets are available from virtually any location in both Lite and Plus. The Pro platform has quite a few customizable options but the other two do not allow many user-defined changes to the initial setup.
 
Score Priority’s mobile app is tricky to navigate because there aren't any buttons to tap. It's all done via the "hamburger" menu (three parallel horizontal lines) that you tap, and then make a choice from there. There are no customization or personalization options. The mobile app and the browser-based platforms share watchlists, so if you set one up on the Plus platform, for example, it is also visible on the mobile app. You can trade all the asset classes on both the browser and the mobile app.
 
All of the Score Priority platforms have streaming data. As mentioned in usability, the Score Priority Lite and Plus websites are extremely limited on tools and customization options. The platforms open new tabs for most analysis tasks, many of which are provided by third parties, so your browser can get messy fast. The Pro site puts everything on one page, and you can designate tabs for the tools you like to use most often. Of course, you pay commissions for this more customizable platform. On Pro, you can customize trading defaults, such as order type and number of shares. The other browser-based platforms do not have much you can customize besides the overall color scheme (light or dark). 
 
That said, you will find the overall layout in the Plus and Pro platforms defaulted to a standard active trader layout with the watchlists and charts on the left and your drill down information and trade ticket to the right. Score Priority Lite puts the trade ticket in the banner in the simple layout view, with the watchlists and alerts to the left. There are a few views you can toggle through, but none of these are much improvement over the simple one as they just allow for multiple charts to be displayed in columns. You need to click into a chart to bring the order banner back when in these multichart views in Lite. Most traders will likely find Lite too simple and will end up opting for Plus or Pro for their trading needs.  
 
Score Priority's mobile trading experience is actually a bit better than the Score Priority Lite platform. The workflow is simple as you just tap on the Order choice while viewing stock information to open an order ticket. There is streaming real-time data, and a relatively comprehensive charting feature set that is more useful than what is available on the Lite platform. 
 
Score Priority clients have access to U.S.-based equities, options, penny stocks, and a smattering of mutual funds and fixed income. Some clients can invest in international assets directly, but those are offered through Score Priority’s UK affiliate. You cannot trade cryptocurrencies or fractional shares of stock. Aside from that, Score Priority customers can trade the following:
 
Score Priority allows you to enter market, limit, and stop limit orders on the browser-based platforms as well as market and limit-if-touched orders. Placing a conditional order requires use of the Sterling Trader Pro platform at an additional cost. You cannot select a tax lot at the time you close a position though you can set an account-wide default, including one that lets you pick the highest-cost holdings first.
 
The Score Priority order router is primarily sequential and does not seek out price improvement. You can automate a trading strategy only through a third-party platform. Score Priority does not disclose its price improvement statistics, preventing evaluation for that metric.
 
Score Priority has different pricing schedules for its three platforms. There are some important nuances to the pricing plans. For example, free-commission trading applies only to stocks and ETFs on the Score Priority Lite platform, and does not include options, OTCBB or Pink Sheets, good 'til cancelled orders, or extended hours trading.﻿﻿
 
You may also end up paying for third party research since the platforms themselves are rather light in that regard. Customers who choose the per-share plan must generate a minimum of $250 per month in commissions or have the difference charged to their accounts. Having so many fee plans causes a great deal of confusion for customers trying to figure out what a transaction might cost, particularly when pricing simplicity and transparency are spreading across the industry. 
 
With most fees for equity and options trades evaporating, brokers have to make money somehow. The fees and commissions listed above are visible to customers, but there are other ways that you cannot see.
 
There is limited news and research available in the Score Priority applications but there are partners and third-party providers that offer additional news and analysis to customers. Some of these third-party resources have news, recommendations, and other research available for free while others charge subscription fees. Unfortunately, most of these third-party tools open new tabs on your browser and are not connected back to the trading engine. If you use one to locate a trading opportunity, you’ll have to find the ticker symbol and enter it yourself.
 
Score Priority does not offer screening tools for stocks, mutual funds, or options strategies but some of the third-party providers have stock screening tools options strategy finders. These research amenities do fill the gap, but they also contribute to the fragmented investing experience. There are no tools on the browser-based platforms.
 
All idea generators are provided by links to third-party partners such as Trade Ideas. There is a portfolio builder in the associated Novoadvisor platform, which is a trade-following and trade-copying service that one could think of as a robo-advisory spinoff that crowdsources investing ideas.
 
Nothing news-related is built into the web platforms. News headlines open links to Yahoo Finance in a separate tab. In the Pro platforms, there are links to the SPC Club, formerly the WhoTrades site, at no extra charge - but, again, it's not integrated. The mobile apps offer a better news feed.
 
Score Priority offers no analyst research or technical analysis capability. Third-party partners have subscription-based services; there is nothing built into the platforms that is available at without incurring an additional charge.  
 
All of the platforms have charting features, though the most complete package is in the Pro platform. The mobile apps actually have more charting functions than the Lite or Plus platforms. 
 
Score Priority provides little education about trading and investing strategies beyond a few videos and older webinars that cover some of the features of their trading applications. Score Priority Club, formerly WhoTrades, is a social investing site with some peer-to-peer help, but it’s no substitute for professionally produced education resources. Score Priority is primarily marketing itself to an intermediate/experienced crowd, so investors who need some additional education to feel confident in the market will need to find alternative sources.
 
Score Priority is lagging behind on some aspects of security:
 
Score Priority isn’t a good fit for retail investors and less active traders. Score Priority is not designed for individual investors who need education, portfolio analysis, or additional research tools like stock screeners to manage a long-term portfolio.
 
The brokerage is meant for active traders, and it is trying to work its way down the development path to attract more traders who are just starting to ramp up. Score Priority may be particularly appealing to blossoming traders who hope to qualify for a funded account through the Try2BFunded partnership, giving them ready access to capital they may not have on their own. Similarly, traders who want to code their own trading system and tack it onto the execution engine may find Score Priority’s cost structure for heavy trading more attractive for the types of trades they want to carry out.
