
The Series 52 is a professional license and certification that qualifies a financial professional to transact municipal securities. It is known as the Municipal Securities Representative Qualification Examination.
 
The exam consists of 75 scored questions. Candidates are given two hours and 30 minutes to complete the exam. The passing score is 70%.
 
The Series 52 exam is developed and offered by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB). The Series 52 qualifies a financial professional to become a licensed municipal securities representative. People who obtain this certification can sell municipal securities such as municipal bonds. They can also perform underwriting analysis for municipal securities. The Series 52 certification is broadly utilized across the financial industry and is endorsed by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA).
 
The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board is an agency that sets standards for the municipal securities industry. It manages the professional qualifications for municipal securities principals, representatives, advisor principals, and advisor representatives. Qualifications for municipal securities professionals are outlined in MSRB Rule G-3. In addition to the Series 52 exam, MSRB also manages the following exams:
 
The Series 52 exam consists of 75 multiple choice questions. It must be completed within 210 minutes. A score of 70% or better is required for passing. The cost of the test is $260.﻿﻿
 
The following material is covered on the exam:
 
Municipal securities representatives that have passed the Series 52 exam and obtained their Municipal Securities Representative Certification can transact or underwrite municipal securities for a sponsoring organization. A municipal securities representative must work for a sponsoring company. As a municipal securities representative, professionals can transact and underwrite municipal securities, provide professional financial advice or consultation in regard to municipals issuance, and generally provide communication to pubic investors on municipal securities.
 https://www.finra.org/registration-exams-ce/qualification-exams/series52