
The Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act is a bipartisan bill designed to aid Americans' ability to save for retirement. The bill seeks to improve the country's retirement prospects. The bill passed the U.S. House of Representatives in a 417–3 vote in July 2019 and then by the Senate as part of the Dec. 19 spending and tax-extension bills. It was signed into law by President Donald Trump on Dec. 20, 2019.﻿﻿
 
The SECURE Act is designed to ease the looming retirement savings crisis by:
 
The bill was drafted to address Americans' difficulty in saving and investing for retirement. A 2018 study by Northwestern Mutual found that one-in-five Americans have no retirement savings at all, while one-in-three of those closest to retirement age have less than $25,000 saved.﻿﻿ Given longer life expectancies than previous generations, coupled with the rate of inflation, a minimum balance of $1 million+ is recommended for retirement accounts by the date one plans to stop working.
 The recommended minimum amount of retirement savings needed to live comfortably 
Part of the problem has been attributed to the shift away from defined-benefit plans, in which an employer guarantees a payout to employees after they retire, to defined-contribution plans, in which an employee saves on their own for retirement, often with the employer contributing a pre-set amount to the employee's retirement fund.
 
Contributions to defined-contribution plans are most often deducted from an employee's paycheck, and the balance is allowed to grow tax-free until withdrawal, usually during retirement. Once they reach a certain age, retirement savers are required to withdraw a set amount from their retirement savings vehicles each year, in what's referred to as a required minimum distribution (RMD). The SECURE Act raised this age from 70½ to 72.﻿﻿ Delaying the age of required distribution means delaying both the tax burden of withdrawals and the drawdown on savings that may need to last the retiree for decades.
 
The SECURE Act builds on previous legislation that was proposed but failed to gain traction in recent years, namely the Family Savings Act and multiple iterations of the Retirement Enhancement and Savings Act (RESA). A version of RESA has been under consideration in the Senate, but the SECURE Act is the legislation that actually passed and became law.
 United States Congress. "H.R.1994 - Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement Act of 2019." Accessed Aug. 23, 2020. Northwestern Mutual. "1 In 3 Americans Have Less Than $5,000 In Retirement Savings." Accessed Aug. 23, 2020.