
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
TD Ameritrade remains one of the largest online brokers and it has continued to build on its edge with beginner investors. TD Ameritrade reaches customers and prospects with on-ramps to its services constructed on a variety of social media sites, including Twitter and Facebook. Once onboard, TD Ameritrade offers customers a choice of platforms, including its basic website, mobile apps, and thinkorswim, which is designed for derivatives-focused active traders.
 
Although Charles Schwab announced that it was acquiring TD Ameritrade at the end of Nov. 2019, the merger of the two brokerage behemoths is expected to take several years to complete. In the meantime, TD Ameritrade is functioning as a separate entity, so we will look at how it ranks as a standalone brokerage and help you decide whether it is a good fit for your investing needs.
 
TD Ameritrade is one of the larger online brokers in the U.S., so it offers multiple platforms aimed at different levels of expertise. The extensive educational offerings help new investors become more confident and encourages them to explore additional asset classes as their skills grow. For active investors and traders, the thinkorswim platform offers all the data, charting, and tools needed to find market opportunities. The sheer number of tools and research available through TD Ameritrade can be a bit overwhelming.
 Extensive research capabilities and numerous news feeds The education offerings are designed to make novice investors more comfortable with a wider variety of asset classes Additional support channels have been developed using Facebook Messenger, WeChat, Twitter and others Clients may have to use more than one trading system to find all the tools they want to use The website is so packed with content and tools that finding a particular item is difficult Numerous website and platform outages were reported during August 2020 
TD Ameritrade tries to make getting started easy, but the breadth of its offerings works against it in this regard. New customers can open and fund an account on the website or mobile apps. The tricky part, however, is choosing the correct account type as TD Ameritrade has a lot to choose from. Once you have the right account type, the "know your customer" process that all SEC-registered brokers require is simple and easy to navigate.
 
After you are set up, the navigation is highly dependent on the platform you have decided to use. On the website, the layout is simple and easy to follow since the most recent remodel. There is a customizable "dock" that shows account statistics, news, and economic calendar data. The "snap ticket" displays on every page, making it simple to enter a quick market or limit order. 
 
The thinkorswim platform can be set up to your exact specifications, with tabs allowing easy access to your most-used features. Customization options on the website are limited, while on thinkorswim, you can specify everything from the tools on each page to the font used to the background color. Every aspect of trading defaults can be set on thinkorswim. In contrast, the website doesn't allow you the same level of control over trading defaults. Most customization options are stored in the cloud, so once you have set them up, they follow you from one device to another.
 
A version of thinkorswim for the web was announced in late May, 2020. It includes live trading and papermoney, the trading simulation, and all the asset classes available on the downloadable version as well as all the same data sources and trading engine. Your watchlists and dynamic watchlist are identical. The main difference is that the web version is primarily transaction-oriented and has a simpler layout than the downloadable package. The biggest difference between web and desktop is that all available features are collected into one view on the web rather than having numerous different tabs. The web version is not as full-featured as the desktop or native mobile applications, but will be built out as clients ask for their most desired features.
 
TD Ameritrade has native mobile apps for iOS and Android as well as a mobile web experience that resizes the screen according to the device you're using. If you set up a watchlist on one platform, it will be accessible elsewhere. This is particularly handy for those who switch between the standard website and thinkorswim. All available asset classes can be traded on mobile devices.
 
Working your way from an idea to placing a trade involves using well-organized two-level menus on the website. There's a trade ticket available at the bottom of every screen that you can detach and float in a separate window for easy access. Charts can also be detached and floated to set up a trading environment, but this is a more involved process compared to what is available through thinkorswim. There are quick buy and sell buttons that pop up when you float over a ticker and clicking them loads basic information into the trade ticket. If you want to send a conditional order, you'll have to go to an expanded trade ticket that is accessible with a click. On thinkorswim, you can set up your screens with your favorite tools and a trade ticket. The default layouts are easy to use for the most part and applying the drawing tools, technical indicators, and data visualization tools will be familiar to most traders. Thinkorswim allows traders to create their own analysis tools as well use a built-in programming language called thinkScript.
 
On the web, you can customize the order type (market, limit, etc.), order quantity, order side (buy or sell), and tax-lot methodology. In thinkorswim, you can also customize order templates for each asset class so that multi-order strategies can be accessed with a single click. You can stage orders for later entry on all platforms.
 
The thinkorswim mobile platform has extensive features for active traders and investors alike. The workflow for options, stocks, and futures is intuitive and powerful. You'll find lots of bells and whistles that make the mobile app a complete solution for most trading purposes, including streaming real-time data and the ability to trade from charts. The regular mobile platform is almost identical in features to the website, so it's an easy transition.
 
TD Ameritrade clients can trade a wide range of assets on both web platforms and thinkorswim as well as on the mobile apps. TD Ameritrade does not enable cryptocurrency trading but you can trade CME Bitcoin futures. Opening a position with fractional shares is not yet available. Beyond that, investors can trade: 
 
Other assets that can be traded online include OTC and FLEX options, unit investment trusts and high-yield corporate bonds (junk bonds).
 
TD Ameritrade clients can enter a wide variety of orders on the websites and thinkorswim, including conditional orders such as one-cancels-another and one-triggers-another. There are no restrictions on order types on mobile platforms. Clients can stage orders for later entry on all platforms.
 
If you've been buying into a particular stock over time, you can select the tax lot when closing part of the position or set an account-wide default for the tax lot choice (such as average cost, last-in-first-out, etc.). You can also set an account-wide default for dividend reinvestment.
 
The way a broker routes your order determines whether you are likely to receive the best possible price at the time your trade is placed. This is called price improvement, which is, in essence, a sale above the bid price or a buy below the offer. 
 
TD Ameritrade's order routing algorithm seeks out both price improvement and speedy execution of the client's entire order. Price improvement statistics that the firm publishes show that most marketable equity orders receive, on average, a little more than 1½ cents per share ($0.015) in price improvement.﻿﻿ TD Ameritrade receives some payment for order flow but it says its order execution engine does not prioritize it. It received, on average, $0.0012 per share in payment for order flow in the third quarter of 2019. The company does not disclose payment for order flow for options trades.
 
Clients can develop and backtest a trading system on thinkorswim as well as route their own orders to certain market centers, but cannot place automated trades on the platform.
 
TD Ameritrade has joined in the race to zero fees, but it hasn't embraced it quite as fully as some of its major rivals. For the most part, however, the broker is in line with the industry.
 
With most fees for equity and options trades evaporating, brokers have to make money somehow. The fees and commissions listed above are visible to customers, but there are other hidden revenue streams—some of which actually can benefit you.
 
The 85 predefined web-based screeners are fully customizable. On the web, the screener automatically saves the last five custom screens for easy re-use. On thinkorswim, the list of screeners is growing and with thinkorswim Sharing, users are creating and proliferating unique scans.
 
Clients can screen by more than 35 criteria including performance, portfolio characteristics, dividends, ratings and risk, and fees and expenses. The Morningstar category criteria on tdameritrade.com lets clients find targeted funds that fall under one or more of the nearly 100 Morningstar categories. Categories range from bear market to Japan stock to target date funds. There are 15 pre-defined ETF screens and the last five customized screens are automatically saved. Clients can choose to name and save any of their custom screens for future use. Screener results can be saved as a watchlist.
 
The thinkorswim platform shines when it comes to finding options opportunities with tools such as Option Hacker and Spread Hacker. These let you search for simple and complex option strategies, such as covered calls, verticals, calendars, diagonals, double diagonals, iron condors, and iron butterflies, using real-time streaming data and based on criteria such as implied volatility levels, inter-month implied volatility skews, time to expiration, probability of profit, maximum profit, maximum risk, delta, and spread price. TD web has Capital IQ Options Screener to screen for covered calls and calendar spreads. Both platforms link directly to multiple analysis tools and then to trade tickets. 
 
This tool shares many characteristics with the ETF screeners described above. This screener also ties into other TD Ameritrade tools. Clients can save mutual fund screen results as watchlists. Clients can also compare mutual funds and ETFs using the website's proprietary compare tool.
 
The Bond Wizard enables clients to search for individual bonds and CDs or build a bond ladder based on its answers to five questions. Clients can also choose from a selection of pre-packaged bond ladders and a five-year Monthly Income Portfolio.
 
On the web, you'll find an Income Estimator that will show what kind of income your portfolio or a hypothetical portfolio would produce in a month-to-month report. The website also has a social sentiment tool. Within the stock profile section of the website, clients can use the Peer Comparison tool to compare a stock to its four closest peers against a variety of fundamental and proprietary social data points. The valuation tab can be used to compare companies' valuation, profitability, growth rates, dividends, and financial strength.
 
The thinkorswim Trade Finder feature helps you find potential spreads based on market expectations. On the web, you'll find CFRA stock research with its Stock Appreciation Research rankings as well as a MarketEdge idea generator and a TradeWise options idea generator. These each spawn a new window though, so it creates a cluttered desktop.
 
A variety or sources are available including real-time streaming, scannable news provided by affiliate TD Ameritrade, Dow Jones, Benzinga, Midnight Trader, MarketWatch, numerous press release wires, TradersAudio live pit audio, CNBC Video, Benzinga Audio Squawk, Econoday calendar data, and Wall Street Horizons.
 
Vickers Inside Trading, MarketEdge, Thomson Reuters, CFRA, Dow Jones, and Credit Suisse. Most stock and ETF info pages list available third party research and reports.
 
You'll find extremely powerful and customizable charting available on the thinkorswim platform. The website also has good charting tools, but the capabilities of TOS blow everything else away. Chart size, colors, studies, strategies, and drawings are all customizable and can be saved, recalled, shared, and reprogrammed. There is also a way to easily create custom candles.
 
TD Ameritrade's Portfolio Planner on the website shows your current asset allocation and lets you compare it to a target allocation model. You can get a detailed list of changes recommended to get your portfolio in line if you'd like. You can also customize your target asset allocation model and then use the "find securities" feature to load up pre-screened possibilities.
 
All balance, margin, and buying power figures are shown in real-time. Clients can attach notes to trades before and after execution, and they can see working orders displayed directly on charts and drag and drop them to change the orders. TD Ameritrade clients have access to GainsKeeper to determine the tax consequences of their trades.
 
TD Ameritrade sets a high bar for trading and investing education. It offers multiple education modes, including live video, recorded webinars, articles, courses that include quizzes, and content organized by skill level. Much of the content is also available in Mandarin and Spanish. Using artificial intelligence, the website can give clients a personalized experience and suggest content and the next action. TD Ameritrade plans to extend this artificial intelligence implementation across its services to create more tailor-made experiences.
 
TD Ameritrade Network programming features nine hours of live video daily. The network originally targeted advanced traders, but it has expanded to offer new traders ways to make their first move. You can view TDAN content on native apps for iOS, Android, Amazon Fire, and Roku.
 
Videos and articles packaged for various levels of investor knowledge can be found on the TD Ameritrade Education page or on the Education tab in the thinkorswim platform.﻿﻿ Content organized into courses, such as "Simple Steps for a Retirement Portfolio" or "Options for Volatility," allow you to dive into the topic, understand new concepts and strategies, and apply them using TD Ameritrade's tools.
 
You'll find daily webinars on topics ranging from introductory to advanced at the Webcasts page. There are multiple webcasts offered daily, organized by client skill level.﻿﻿ There are articles organized by topic in the Investment Articles section of the website, plus clients can subscribe to a print magazine, thinkMoney, founded by the thinkorswim group.﻿﻿ Articles are well-organized, written simply without being condescending, and cover a wide variety of topics from introductions to advanced strategies. Visit a branch to check out the live event schedule; TD Ameritrade has about 1,500 of these scheduled annually.
 
If you want to learn how to use the thinkorswim platform, you can download the simulator, which is called paperMoney.﻿﻿
 
TD Ameritrade's security is up to industry standards:
 
TD Ameritrade's multiple platforms make research and trading accessible to a wide range of investors and traders. Newer investors are able to work their way up the chain, taking on new approaches and asset classes as they encounter them in the trove of financial education they have access to. Traders and active investors will enjoy the capabilities of the thinkorswim platform, including the ability to create custom indicators and share asset screens in a wider community. 
 
Of course, the announced acquisition of TD Ameritrade by Charles Schwab generates some uncertainty. Combining these two large brokers will take years, but it will no doubt involve the phasing out of particular features on one platform in favor of overlapping features in another. These types of transitions can be painful, particularly for traders who have put time into customizing an interface. Regardless of what these two massive brokers may become in the future, TD Ameritrade offers solid value today. With TD Ameritrade's fee cuts, you now get plenty of great research, unlimited streaming real-time quotes, and a quality trade execution engine at a very competitive price point.
 Investopedia is dedicated to providing investors with unbiased, comprehensive reviews and ratings of online brokers. Our reviews are the result of months of evaluating all aspects of an online broker’s platform, including the user experience, the quality of trade executions, the products available on its platforms, costs and fees, security, the mobile experience and customer service. We established a rating scale based on our criteria, collecting thousands of data points that we weighed into our star-scoring system. In addition, every broker we surveyed was required to fill out an extensive survey about all aspects of its platform that we used in our testing. Many of the online brokers we evaluated provided us with in-person demonstrations of its platforms at our offices. Our team of industry experts, led by Theresa W. Carey, conducted our reviews and developed this best-in-industry methodology for ranking online investing platforms for users at all levels. Click here to read our full methodology. TD Ameritrade Network. "The Watch List." Accessed March 18, 2020.