
In mutual fund investing, the old adage that high costs indicate quality couldn't be further from the truth. There is no proof that paying a higher fee results in higher returns. If anything, the mutual fund manager of a high-cost fund might take more risks in the attempt to produce a higher return. If the manager's risky moves don't pan out, you've forked over more money in costs and taken capital losses.
 
To avoid paying high fees only to suffer losses, it is essential to consider which class of mutual fund shares is suitable for you. The class of shares helps to determine what kind of fees you will be paying when you invest in a mutual fund. Here we give an overview of these different classes.
 
While stock classes indicate the number of voting rights per share, mutual fund classes indicate the type and number of fees charged for the shares in a fund.
 
Mutual fund companies can have seven or more classes of shares for a particular fund. However, there are three main types of mutual fund classes: A, B, and C.﻿﻿ They are also known as A-shares, B-shares, and C-shares. Each of these classes has various benefits and drawbacks. Let's examine each in turn.
 
A-shares charge an upfront sales fee, or front-end load, that is taken off your initial investment.﻿﻿
 
The B-shares are classified by their back-end or contingent deferred sales charge. This fee is paid when you sell shares a specified period of years after the original purchase. These shares are typically good for investors with little investment cash and a long investment horizon.﻿﻿
 
Class C shares are a type of level-load fund, which charges an annual fee. This class works well for individuals who will be redeeming shares in the short term.﻿﻿
 
Although we've looked at all three classes, the middle class of mutual funds—the B-shares—have been disappearing from the mutual fund industry. There are several reasons for this, but chief among them was more regulatory focus on fees.﻿﻿ 12b-1 fees have been under attack, acting as a source of shareholder lawsuits against fund companies for alleged misuse.﻿﻿ Many funds are dropping these fees and shrinking the class offerings to compete with exchange-traded funds (ETFs).﻿﻿ ETFs themselves put pressure on Class B shares by providing a low-fee alternative for investors with limited investment capital. In short, Class B shares still exist, but they are a dying breed.
 
Let's look at how the characteristics and pros and cons described above work in the following share classes of the hypothetical ABC Company Bond Fund.
 
ABC Company Bond Fund, A Versus C Comparison
 - 2017 total yearly return = 8.86% - expense ratio = 1.2% - $1,000 min investment - 2017 total yearly return = 9.35% - expense ratio = 1.95% - $2,500 min investment 
Source: Hypothetical bond fund, based on a model from PIMCO
 
In this example, you can see how these two different share classes are better for different types of investors and situations. Suppose that you plan on investing in this fund for retirement and your retirement is 20 years away. Class A shares would work best because they offer costs that decline over time. If you plan to invest just one lump-sum amount and it is enough to qualify for a breakpoint discount, Class A would also be the best over time. With a large initial investment, you would get a discount on the load. Your yearly expense ratio and 12b-1 fees would also be very low, allowing your investment to grow.
 
Class C shares would work best if you are planning to invest for a limited period of more than one year but less than three. In this way, you avoid both front-end and back-end loads. Although your expense ratio will typically be higher than Class A shares, your full investment will gain interest while it is invested. Since you are only in the fund for a few years, the yearly fees do not have a chance to pile up.
 
When deciding which class of mutual fund shares to choose, remember to read the prospectus. In addition, you must take into account your investment horizon and the amount you have available to invest. The frequency of your investments and the probability that you will need to withdraw funds early are also essential considerations.
 Investor.gov. "Investor Bulletin: Mutual Fund Classes." Accessed April 11, 2020. FINRA. "Do Your Mutual Fund Investments Qualify for Discounts?" Accessed April 11, 2020. FINRA. "Updated: Understanding Mutual Fund Classes." Accessed April 11, 2020. FINRA. "Understanding Mutual Fund Classes," Page 3. Accessed April 11, 2020. U.S. Security and Exchange Commission. "Mutual Funds and ETFS," Page 34. Accessed April 11, 2020. U.S. Security and Exchange Commission. "SEC Proposes Measures to Improve Regulation of Fund Distribution Fees and Provide Better Disclosure for Investors." Accessed April 11, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "SEC Share Class Initiative Returning More Than $125 Million to Investors." Accessed April 11, 2020. Business Wire. "Fidelity Rewrites the Rules of Investing to Deliver Unparalleled Value and Simplicity to Investors." Accessed April 11, 2020.