
Understanding how disasters happened to investors in the past can help current investors avoid them in the future. Here are some of the all-time most significant cases of companies betraying their investors. Some of these cases are truly amazing. Try to look at them from a shareholder's perspective. Unfortunately, the shareholders involved had no way of knowing what was really happening as they were being tricked into investing.
 
Barry Minkow, the owner of this business, claimed that this carpet cleaning company of the 1980s would become the "General Motors of carpet cleaning."﻿﻿ Minkow appeared to be building a multi-million dollar corporation, but he did so through forgery and theft. He created more than 20,000 phony documents and sales receipts without anybody suspecting anything.﻿﻿
 
Although his business was a complete fraud designed to deceive auditors and investors, Minkow shelled out more than $4 million to lease and renovate an office building in San Diego. ZZZZ Best went public in December of 1986, eventually reaching a market capitalization of more than $200 million. Amazingly, Barry Minkow was only a teenager at the time. He was sentenced to 25 years in prison.﻿﻿
 
In December 1996, Emanuel Pinez, the CEO of Centennial Technologies, and his management recorded that the company made $2 million in revenue from PC memory cards.﻿﻿ However, the company was really shipping fruit baskets to customers. The employees then created fake documents as evidence that they were recording sales. Centennial's stock rose 451% to $55.50 per share on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
According to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), between April 1994 and December 1996, Centennial overstated its earnings by about $40 million. Amazingly, the company reported profits of $12 million when it had lost approximately $28 million.﻿﻿ The stock plunged to less than $3. Over 20,000 investors lost almost all of their investment in a company that was once considered a Wall Street darling.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
This Canadian company was involved in one of the largest stock swindles in history. Its Indonesian gold property, which was reported to contain more than 200 million ounces, was said to be the richest gold mine, ever.﻿﻿ The stock price for Bre-X skyrocketed to a high of $280 (split-adjusted), making millionaires out of ordinary people overnight. At its peak, Bre-X had a market capitalization of $4.4 billion.﻿﻿
 
The party ended on March 19, 1997, when the gold mine proved to be fraudulent, and the stock tumbled to pennies shortly after. The major losers were the Quebec public sector pension fund, which lost $70 million, the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board, which lost $100 million, and the Ontario Municipal Employees' Retirement Board, which lost $45 million.﻿﻿
 
Prior to this debacle, Enron, a Houston-based energy trading company was, based on revenue, the seventh-largest company in the United States.﻿﻿ Through some complicated accounting practices that involved the use of shell companies, Enron was able to keep hundreds of millions worth of debt off its books. Doing so fooled investors and analysts into thinking this company was more fundamentally stable than it actually was. Additionally, the shell companies, run by Enron executives, recorded fictitious revenues, essentially recording one dollar of revenue, multiple times. This practice created the appearance of incredible earnings figures.﻿﻿
 
Eventually, the complex web of deceit unraveled, and the share price dove from over $90 to less than 30 cents. As Enron fell, it took down with it Arthur Andersen, the fifth leading accounting firm in the world at the time.﻿﻿ Andersen, Enron's auditor, basically imploded after David Duncan, Enron's chief auditor, ordered the shredding of thousands of documents.﻿﻿ The fiasco at Enron made the phrase "cook the books" a household term, once again.﻿﻿
 
Not long after the collapse of Enron, the equities market was rocked by another billion-dollar accounting scandal. Telecommunications giant WorldCom came under intense scrutiny after yet another instance of some serious "book cooking." WorldCom recorded operating expenses as investments.﻿﻿ Apparently, the company felt that office pens, pencils, and paper were an investment in the future of the company and, therefore, expensed (or capitalized) the cost of these items over a number of years.
 
In total, $3.8 billion worth of normal operating expenses, which should all be recorded as expenses for the fiscal year in which they were incurred, were treated as investments and were recorded over a number of years. This little accounting trick grossly exaggerated profits for the year the expenses were incurred. In 2001, WorldCom reported profits of more than $1.3 billion. In fact, its business was becoming increasingly unprofitable. Who suffered the most in this deal? The employees; tens of thousands of them lost their jobs. The next ones to feel the betrayal were the investors who had to watch the gut-wrenching downfall of WorldCom's stock price, as it plummeted from more than $60 to less than $1.﻿﻿
 
With WorldCom having already shaken investor confidence, the executives at Tyco ensured that 2002 would be an unforgettable year for stocks. Before the scandal, Tyco was considered a safe blue chip investment, manufacturing electronic components, health care, and safety equipment. During his reign as CEO, Dennis Kozlowski, who was reported as one of the top 25 corporate managers by BusinessWeek, siphoned hordes of money from Tyco, in the form of unapproved loans and fraudulent stock sales.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Along with CFO Mark Swartz and CLO Mark Belnick, Kozlowski received $170 million in low-to-no interest loans without shareholder approval. Kozlowski and Belnick arranged to sell 7.5 million shares of unauthorized Tyco stock for a reported $430 million.﻿﻿ These funds were smuggled out of the company usually disguised as executive bonuses or benefits. Kozlowski used the funds to further his lavish lifestyle, which included handfuls of houses, an infamous $6,000 shower curtain, and a $2 million birthday party for his wife.﻿﻿ In early 2002, the scandal slowly began to unravel and Tyco's share price plummeted nearly 80% in a six-week period. The executives escaped their first hearing due to a mistrial but were eventually convicted and sentenced to 25 years in jail.﻿﻿
 
Accounting for large corporations can be a difficult task, particularly when executives want to falsify earnings reports. In the late 1990s, CEO and founder Richard Scrushy began instructing employees to inflate revenues and overstate HealthSouth's net income. At the time, the company was one of America's largest health care service providers, experiencing rapid growth and acquiring a number of other healthcare-related firms.﻿﻿ The first sign of trouble surfaced in late 2002 when Scrushy reportedly sold HealthSouth shares worth $75 million prior to releasing an earnings loss.﻿﻿ An independent law firm concluded the sale was not directly related to the loss, and investors should have heeded the warning.
 
The scandal unfolded in March 2003, when the SEC announced that HealthSouth exaggerated revenues by $2.7 billion.﻿﻿ The information came to light when CFO William Owens, working with the FBI, taped Scrushy discussing the fraud.﻿﻿ The repercussions were swift as the stock fell 97% to a close of 11 cents in a single day.﻿﻿ Amazingly, the CEO was acquitted of 36 counts of fraud but was later convicted on charges of bribery. ﻿﻿ Apparently, Scrushy arranged political contributions of $500,000, allowing him to ensure a seat on the hospital regulatory board.﻿﻿
 
Bernard Madoff, the former chairman of the Nasdaq and founder of the market-making firm Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities, was turned in by his two sons and arrested on Dec. 11, 2008, for allegedly running a Ponzi scheme.﻿﻿ The 70-year-old kept his hedge fund losses hidden by paying early investors with money raised from others. This fund consistently recorded an 11% gain every year for 15 years. The fund's supposed strategy, which was provided as the reason for these consistent returns, was to use proprietary option collars that are meant to minimize volatility.﻿﻿ This scheme duped investors out of approximately $50 billion.﻿﻿
 
The worst thing about these scams is that investors were blindsided. Those convicted of fraud might serve several years in prison, which costs investors/taxpayers even more money. The SEC works to prevent such scams, but with thousands of public companies in North America, it is nearly impossible to ensure that disaster will not strike again.﻿﻿
 
Is there a moral to this story? Yes. Always invest with care, and diversify, diversify, diversify. Maintaining a well-diversified portfolio will ensure that occurrences like these do not run you off the road, but instead remain mere speed bumps on your path to financial independence.
 The Wall Street Journal. "Fallen Star: How Whiz-Kid Chief Of ZZZZ Best Had, and Lost, It All." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. Los Angeles Times. "Con Man on How Not to Be Taken to Cleaners: Fraud: Former ZZZ Best whiz kid Barry Minkow fresh from prison, tries to make amends on lecture circuit." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. The New York Times. "Nothing But ZZZZ Best." Accessed Aug. 3, 2020. CaseText. "Securities and Exchange Commission v. Peretz." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "SEC v. James Murphy, Robert Lockwood and Gilboa Peretz, Civ. Action No. 00CV11981-PBS (D. Mass., filed September 26, 2000); SEC v. Emanuel Pinez, Civ. Action No.97cv10353-PBS (D. Mass. D. Mass., 3rdAmended Complaint filed September 26, 2000)." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. Wired. "Ex-Centennial CEO on Trial." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. The New York Times. "Jail and $150 Million Restitution for Fraud." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. Calgary Herald. "Back to Busang." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. Calgary Herald. "Gold nuggets: A digest of Bre-X facts." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. Maclean's. "The blame game." Accessed Aug. 5, 2020. Forbes. "Enron The Incredible." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Corporate Finance Institute. "Enron Scandal." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Los Angeles Times. "Arthur Andersen's Audit Standards Pass Review." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. The New York Times. "Enron's Collapse: The Overview; Arthur Andersen Fires an Executive for Enron Orders." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. ABC News. "WorldCom Admits $3.8 Billion Accounting Trick." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Fortune. "Why Kozlowski should get clemency." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. The New York Times. "2 Top Tyco Executives Charged With $600 Million Fraud Scheme." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. BioWorld. "Court report: Tyco will pay $3 billion to settle 'majority' of shareholder suits." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Herold Financial Dictionary. "What was the Tyco International Scandal?" Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Alabama Southern Division. "United States of America v. Richard M. Scrushy, Defendant," Page 2. Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. "From Wall Street to Prison: The HealthSouth Story." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Alabama Southern Division. "United States of America v. Richard M. Scrushy, Defendant," Page 8. Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. The Washington Post. "Ex-HealthSouth Officer Says He Was Wired by FBI." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Las Vegas Sun. "HealthSouth stock wiped out, exec to plead guilty." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. The New York Times. "HealthSouth Founder Acquitted of All Counts of Corporate Fraud." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Reuters. "Out of prison, former HealthSouth CEO Scrushy seeks redemption." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Reuters. "Bernard Madoff's elder son dead in suicide." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. SSRN Electronic Journal. "Mr. Madoff's Amazing Returns: An Analysis of the Split-Strike Conversion Strategy." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "SEC Charges Bernard L. Madoff for Multi-Billion Dollar Ponzi Scheme." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "How Investigations Work." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020.