
2020 has brought new headline risks for investors to absorb, especially around the novel coronavirus. By many accounts, authorities are taking aggressive measures to contain the outbreak and limit its contagion effects. These actions are likely helping to limit the negative humanitarian impact, but may also have a perverse effect on the economy as production remains limited for what increasingly looks like an extended time. This also impacts the supply side for many companies with sizable Chinese exposure. This backdrop and subsequent market correction makes the case for investors to look for diversification options to complement their portfolios with stock and bond valuations being threatened and volatility increasing.
 
Investors have a multitude of options that deliver uncorrelated (or even inversely correlated) returns to equities ranging from the simple, to the complex, to the manufactured. In today’s market, investors may benefit from recalling Occam’s razor when it comes to seeking a solution for their portfolios as simpler approaches may have greater benefits than sophisticated ones. First and foremost, complexity comes with a price whether that be higher expenses or a higher requirement for understanding the drivers of the diversification potential, and its ability to do so going forward.
 
In the spirit of keeping it simple, one can look at three distinct assets – gold, utility stocks, and long-term treasurys – and examine their historical correlations to the S&P 500. Over the 8-year period illustrated below, gold has a 0.07 correlation, utilities a 0.23 correlation, and long-term treasuries a -0.32 correlation. While individually, these assets will see their correlations shift through time with utilities recently having a higher correlation and long-term treasuries a lower one, the trio of asset classes, together, delivers an average correlation of 0.00. Perhaps more importantly, all of the three have relatively stable volatilities and are uncorrelated with each other, making them attractive from a diversification perspective.
 
Since March 2015, investors have added over $179 billion to what Bloomberg Intelligence has classified as representing safe haven ETFs. This group includes funds offering exposure to gold, US treasuries and low volatility equities. Over this period, US treasurys have seen the greatest interest with over $105.6 billion of inflows, while gold has been the least with $19.1 billion of inflows.
 
Flows across these 3 groups have averaged $3 billion monthly with US treasurys accounting for more than half of that, seeing $1.8 billion monthly. Both the cumulative totals and consistent monthly net flows highlights how ETF investors may be interested in potentially buffering their portfolios in the event of a sell-off. In other words, while safe havens saw an impressive $36.2 billion of inflows in the fourth quarter of 2018, activity was consistent and generally positive before and after this most recent sell-off.
 
Heading into 2020, consensus among economists was that we should see an acceleration of global economic growth thanks to a combination of reduced uncertainty around trade, looser monetary policy, and a general pickup in activity, especially in the emerging markets. While this view may eventually come to fruition, it likely needs to be pushed out into the future thanks to the impact that the coronavirus will have on China and all of its related trade linkages. Relative to bonds, stocks continue to look attractive; however, the path forward looks increasingly volatile, making the case for introducing defensive exposures.
 
Gold and treasurys offering diversification potential relative to stocks is intuitive, but utilities having a 0.23 correlation may be less so. In addition to generally stable revenue and cash flow streams, one driver is related to the profile of utilities being a sector with above average dividend yields implying that a greater portion of an investor’s total return would come from income as opposed to capital appreciation, all else being equal. Another sector with high income potential and interest rate sensitivity is real estate. However, real estate has a much higher beta, or sensitivity of its volatility, to the S&P 500 than utilities do. So, while their most recent beta for real estate is below that of utilities, it is higher more often than not, and does not offer the consistency that investors require when it comes to diversified exposures that are intended to be there for them when they need it most.
 
A greater concern for utilities may be that, related to their current valuation, they look expensive relative to history and the broader market. However, as previously noted, the market itself is at the top end of its valuation range. One could agree that out-of-favor sectors like energy may be a better buffer than utilities from a valuation standpoint, but that would be ignoring the impact that energy firms have a heavy reliance on the demand for petrochemicals, which would likely be negatively impacted in the event of a selloff. While investors should always be cognizant of the valuation they are paying for any asset, in today’s market, utilities are not necessarily in a position to perform differently than they have in previous pullbacks simply because they are trading richly relative to current sales and earnings.
 
Compared to Real Estate, Utilities have a Lower Beta to the S&P 500 on Average
