
Exxon Mobil Corporation (XOM) is one of the largest publicly traded oil and gas companies in the world, boasting a market capitalization of $341.54 billion on November 2, 2018. Exxon Mobil was founded in 1870 and is the primary corporate descendant of Standard Oil Company. The oil and gas company is also one of the seven major oil companies that dominated the oil industry from the 1940s to the 1970s, called the "Seven Sisters."
 
Exxon Mobil released Q3 2018 earnings on November 2, 2018. The company reported $76.6 billion in revenues this quarter, compared to  27, 2018, compared to $66.2 billion over the same period last year.
 
The three largest individual shareholders of Exxon Mobil stock are all current or former executives in the company. We have also given Rex Tillerson, former Exxon Mobil CEO and a Secretary of State under the Trump Administration until March 2018, an honorable mention.
 Exxon Mobil's market capitalization as of November 2, 2018. 
Michael Dolan served as Exxon Mobil's senior vice president from 2008 until his retirement from the company in August 2018. Dolan's career at Exxon began 38 years ago as a research engineer in Paulsboro, NJ. After holding several positions in New Jersey, Dolan was transferred to Mobil Australia to become the company's technical manager of refining operations. Dolan eventually became vice president and general manager for Mobil's petrochemical operations in the Americas, just prior to the 1999 merger of Exxon and Mobil.
 
After the corporate merger, Dolan was made the Middle East and Africa regional director of Exxon Mobil Chemical Company. He later worked as executive vice president of Exxon Mobil Saudi Arabia, and vice president of Exxon Mobil, prior to assuming the position of senior vice president. Dolan is the largest individual shareholder of Exxon Mobil stock according to a February 6, 2018, filing with the SEC. The former senior vice president owns about 1.1 million shares of the company directly and another 12.1 million shares indirectly through a company savings plan.
 
Dolan earned a Bachelor of Science degree in chemical engineering at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and an MBA at Drexel University.
 
Senior Vice President and Principal Financial Officer Andrew P. Swinger joined Exxon Mobil in 1978 as an engineer in Louisiana. Over the course of 40 years, Swiger has held numerous positions in the company's global operations, including a general manager at Exxon Mobil's major Singapore plant, a production vice president for the African and European regions in the company's London office, and an executive vice president of ExxonMobil production in Texas. 
 
According to Swiger's latest filing with the SEC on November 29, 2017, he is the company's second-largest individual shareholder with 944,298 shares held directly and 18.8 million shares held indirectly through a company savings plan.
 
Andrew Swiger earned a Bachelor of Science degree in petroleum engineering from the Colorado School of Mines.
 
A Texas man from childhood, former Senior Vice President Mark Albers graduated from Texas A&M and joined up with Exxon Mobile shortly after in 1979. In his time with the company, Albers has held a number of managerial positions around the world, including technical manager in Australia and Alaska interests manager. In 2004, Albers became president of ExxonMobil development in the Texas HQ, and shortly after was elected to the Senior VP position.
 
Albers serves on the board of the United States Council for International Business, and on the board of the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering. Albers announced the end of his 38-year career with the company on April 1, 2018. As of November 29, 2018, Albers remains the company's third-largest individual shareholder, with 878,722 shares of the Exxon Mobil held directly and 23 million shares held indirectly through a company savings plan.
 
Albers earned a Bachelor of Science degree in petroleum engineering from Texas A&M.
 
Rex Tillerson started at Exxon in 1975 as a production engineer and assumed the positions of chairman and chief executive officer just over 30 years later in 2006. Tillerson has a long and distinguished history at Exxon Mobil, holding positions at various levels and locations within the company. In 1989, he was appointed the general manager of the central production division of Exxon Company U.S.A., overseeing oil and gas production in the critical areas of Texas and Oklahoma. His work earned him the position of production advisor at Exxon in 1992. Tillerson's work with the company then took him overseas as the president of Exxon Yemen Inc.
 
In 1998, he moved on to become the president of Exxon Neftegas Ltd. and vice president of Exxon Ventures Inc., where he managed Exxon's affairs in Russia. Prior to assuming his current position at the company, Tillerson also served as executive vice president of Exxon Mobil Development Company, senior vice president of Exxon Mobil, and president of Exxon Mobil.
 
Tillerson was selected by then-President Elect Donald Trump to serve as his Secretary of State and was given a $180 million retirement package from Exxon Mobil. Tillerson, the company's former largest individual stockholder, sold off all of his stock in the company, including stock options for the future. Although Tillerson is no longer a shareholder, the former CEO's influence over the company and the country have been massive.
 
On March 13, 2018, Tillerson was fired from the White House by President Trump.
