
Alibaba (BABA), the global leader by volume in the e-commerce sector, issued a record-shattering $25 billion IPO in September 2014. The company is likened to Amazon, eBay, PayPal, and Google all rolled into one.
 
The company announced its fiscal second-quarter 2020 earnings in Nov. 2019. The global e-commerce company reported $16.65 million in revenues for the quarter, topping expectations of $16.47 billion.
 
Alibaba has grown to be one of China's largest companies, with extensive influence in the world. It first gained control over the Chinese e-commerce market, with a reported 80% of online retail sales in China going through the company. It offers a suite of products for storefronts that want to compete in the e-commerce market. The company's key business segments include mobile media and entertainment, cloud computing, and core commerce, along with other developing initiatives.
 
As of Jan. 13, 2020, those business segments have earned the company a market capitalization of $595 billion. The company's shares stood at $230, well beyond its post-IPO market price of $115 and trading at all-time highs.
 
Alibaba co-founder and chairman Jack Ma was the largest individual shareholder of the company for many years, until he relished his 11% ownership stake last year. In the early 1990s, Ma realized China lacked technology in the business world. He founded China Pages, one of China's first internet companies, which created a website for businesses, and then went on to work for an Internet company that was backed by the Chinese government. It wasn't until 1999, though, that he decided to branch out on his own and co-founded Alibaba.
 
The company first developed its name in China before going global. In 2005, the company attracted the attention of Yahoo!, which took out a majority stake in the company. According to Forbes, Ma has a net worth of $44.3 billion and is one of the wealthiest people in the world. He also owns stakes in Chinese companies. Huayi Brothers and Beijing Enlight Media. In September 2019, Ma retired from Alibaba.
 
Here are Alibaba's five largest individual and institutional shareholders as of Sept. 30, 2019, unless otherwise indicated.
 Jack Ma is the 21st-richest person in the world, according to Forbes. 
Softbank owns 29.4% of Alibaba and is its largest shareholder. Softbank invested $20 million in Alibaba back in 2000 when it was a young startup. In fact, Softbank founder and CEO Masayoshi Son was the one that bought into Alibaba. 
 
Softbank’s Alibaba stake is now worth nearly $125 billion. Softbank sold part of its stake in 2019, booking over $11 billion in pre-tax profits. 
 
Alibaba co-founder and vice-chairman Joseph Tsai is the second-largest shareholder in the company, with 11.9% of the outstanding stock. Tsai is a Taiwanese-Canadian businessman who met Ma while working for the Hong Kong branch of an investment company.
 
Tsai quit his high-paying job so the two could work together to create the online import-export marketplace that would eventually become Alibaba. According to Forbes, Tsai's net worth is $12.1 billion. He owns a 49% stake in the Brooklyn Nets National Basketball Association team and has two degrees from Yale.
 
Altaba owns 11.13% of Alibaba, making it the company’s third-largest shareholder. Altaba is the Yahoo spinoff that was created to hold Yahoo’s Alibaba and Yahoo Japan stake. Altaba announced in 2019 that it plans to sell its Alibaba.
 
The fourth-largest shareholder in Alibaba is Blackrock. The investment firm owns 3% of shares outstanding. The global investment management firm is based in New York City and has 70 offices in more than 30 different countries. It was founded as a risk management and fixed-income institutional asset manager in 1988. The firm has some $7 trillion in assets under management.
 
The company provides a range of financial services. But its largest division is iShares, with more than 800 exchange traded funds (ETFs)—the largest ETF provider in the world.
 
T. Rowe Price is a global asset management firm that was founded in 1937. It offers a range of services including funds, account management, retirement plans, and advisory services for individuals, corporations, and other institutions. T. Rowe Price owns 2.8% of Alibaba.
 
The firm is headquartered in Baltimore, Md., and has offices in almost 50 countries. The firm has over $1 trillion in assets under management. According to its website, the average investment experience of its advisers is 22 years.
