
The world moves on news. From decisions based on coverage of financial markets and political developments to those based on local news or weather reports, the news impacts our lives directly and indirectly. News is available and accessed in multiple formats: digital (online news content), print (newspapers and magazines), and broadcasting (TV and radio).
 
Audience reach is an important parameter when assessing the business potential of news companies. However, it is good to keep in mind that news companies are diversifying more and more by investing in non-news related businesses that may include software, data analytics, and real estate services. Investors looking for investments in news-only companies should carefully study the overall business of a company to ensure that its operations fit into their desired investment profile.
 
Here are some of the world’s top news companies, arranged in the decreasing order of the available market cap figures as of November 2018.
 
Market cap: $7.48 billion
 
News Corp. (NWS) is a diversified information and media services company. It was formed when Rupert Murdoch split News Corporation into two entities: News Corp and 21st Century Fox. Focused on news and information services, News Corp. has four additional segments: Cable Network Programming, Digital Real Estate Services, Book Publishing, and Other (which includes paid television services, book publishing, and other online services). Its famous brands include The Times, Dow Jones, The Wall Street Journal, The Sun, Herald Sun, HarperCollins Publishers, and FOX Sports.
 
Market cap: $4.21 billion
 
Owner of reputed brands like The New York Times (NYT), The New York Times International Edition and NYTimes.com, The New York Times Company is a global media company grounded in journalism that owns and operates its own digital platforms. 
 
Market cap: $3.39 billion
 
Tribune Media (TRCO) is a diversified broadcasting company with television and digital channels that provide news, entertainment and sports programming. It owns and operates more than 40 TV stations, and Its WGN America alone reaches more than 80 million households. The company also makes strategic investments in other media businesses, including TV Food Network, Classified Ventures, and Mashable.
 
Market cap: $2.82 billion
 
Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT) is a UK-based company established in 1922 and listed on the London Stock Exchange. It owns newspapers and television and radio stations. It has a significant presence globally through its subsidiary DMG World Events and DMG Information. It also operates in data analytics, information, and entertainment.
 
Market cap: $1.38 billion
 
E.W. Scripps (SSP) is a large media group that was founded in 1878. It operates TV stations, newspapers, and local and national digital media sites. Its business is split across three streams: television, newspapers and content syndication, and other, including the Scripps National Spelling Bee. 
 
Market cap: $1.12 billion
 
Gannett (GCI) is a diversified news and media information company that operates in broadcasting, publishing, and digital. The most famous brand the company owns is USA Today. Its broadcasting segment runs 43 TV stations; its publishing segment provides daily content through more than 80 daily publications and more than 400 non-daily local publications; and its digital segment covers content through digital platforms, digital marketing services, and an online HR software solution. 
 
Market cap: $325.86 million
 
Daily Journal (DJCO) operates as an information service provider through print and digital media, primarily in California and Arizona. Well-known brands include The Los Angeles Daily Journal, Daily Commerce, The San Francisco Daily Journal, The Daily Recorder, The Inter-City Express, The Orange County Reporter, Business Journal and The Record Reporter. 
 
Market cap: $98.83 million
 
A. H. Belo (AHC) is focused on local newspapers, including The Dallas Morning News, The Providence Journal, and The Denton Record-Chronicle. The company also has audience-specific publications.
 
Market cap: $54.58 million
 
The McClatchy Company (MNI) has 30 daily newspapers, non-daily newspapers, web portals, and digital publications that include advertising services in 29 markets in the US. Their holdings include the (Fort Worth) Star-Telegram, The Sacramento Bee, The Kansas City Star, the Miami Herald, The Charlotte Observer, and The (Raleigh) News & Observer. 
