
The exchange-traded funds (ETFs) below offer diversified investment in European government bonds, with hedging in non-European countries, particularly Japan.
 
European government bonds carry more risk than U.S. government bonds in the current market environment because many countries in Europe are currently experiencing upheaval. Across the continent, Brexit is also affecting economies and cross-border relationships.
 
The European Central Bank is keeping interest rates low but has begun to remove some quantitative easing measures with plans for tapering Treasury purchases and potential incremental rate hikes on the horizon. This leads to a healthier outlook for the European government bond market and specifically countries in the Eurozone.
 
We have selected four of the top international government bond ETFs with a high allocation to European countries. These funds are likely to gain from positive economic trends affecting Europe this year, but for the time being, they have been flat to lower. The funds were selected based on long-term stability and assets under management. All four funds are slightly lower so far in 2018. All data is as of September 16, 2018.
 
iShares International Treasury Bond (IGOV) is an ETF that holds bonds denominated in local currencies. IGOV tracks the S&P/Citigroup International Treasury Bond Index Ex-US. European countries represented in the Fund’s holdings include Italy, the U.K., France, Austria, Denmark, Portugal, Belgium, and Ireland. It does not have specific parameters for bond maturity duration.
 
Assets under management are $886.05 million. The current price is $48.39. In 2017, the YTD return for IGOV was 11.33%. After seesawing in the first half of 2018, it's down 2.72%. One-year, three-year, and five-year annualized total returns are -2.64%, 2.75%, and 0.43%.
 
This iShares 1-3 Year International Treasury Bond ETF (ISHG) seeks to track the investment results of the S&P/Citigroup International Treasury Bond Index Ex-US 1-3 Year. Like the Index, it invests in international developed market Treasury bonds outside of the U.S. that have maturities of one to three years. Its top allocation is for Japan, with 21.6% of the Fund’s investment. European countries round out the remainder of the investments with high allocations to France, Italy, Germany, Belgium, Spain, and the U.K.
 
Assets under management are $77.84 million. The current price is $81.80. In 2017, the YTD return for ISHG was 10.40%. So far, in 2018, it's down 2.70%. One-year, three-year, and five-year annualized total returns are -2.95%, 1.22%, and -2.30%.
 
SPDR Bloomberg Barclays Short Term International Treasury Bond ETF (BWZ) tracks the Bloomberg Barclays 1-3 Year Global Treasury Ex-US Capped Index. This fund focuses on securities that have maturities of one to three years. The holdings in this fund are denominated in local currencies. BWZ has exposure to Japan. European country investments include Germany, France, Spain, the U.K., Belgium, and Italy.
 
Assets under management are $265.72 million. The current price is $31.19. In 2017, the YTD return for BWZ was 9.78%. So far, in 2018, it's down 2.70%. One-year, three-year, and five-year annualized total returns are -2.94%, 1.43%, and -2.20%.
 
The SPDR Bloomberg Barclays International Treasury Bond ETF fund (BWX) has significant European exposure. The Fund also invests in emerging markets and has investments in Japan and Canada. It tracks the Bloomberg Barclays Global Treasury Ex-US Capped Index. Its European country investments include Italy, Spain, Belgium, France, Austria, and the Netherlands. It is important to note that all of the Fund’s investments are denominated in local currencies, meaning that a weak U.S. dollar could be an advantage.
 
Assets under management are $1.12 billion. The current price is $27.47. In 2017, the YTD return for BWX was 9.84%. So far, in 2018, the ETF is down 2.34%. One-year, three-year, and five-year annualized total returns are -2.64%, 2.50%, and 0.14%.
 
European Treasury bonds are reporting some of the international Treasury market’s top returns. Investing in European government bonds is undoubtedly riskier than investing in U.S. government bonds. However, as economies and new cross-border relationships develop, there could be some decent returns available from these four ETFs.
