
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Financial technology, commonly referred to as fintech, has become one of the fastest-growing industries in the world. The term encompasses a broad range of software, technological innovations and services for use in personal or professional investing and banking.
 
For investors who want to gain a better understanding of the industry, here are five of the best books written explaining what is all about and how it is changing the financial services sector.
 Amazon 
Subtitled "The Financial Technology Handbook for Investors, Entrepreneurs, and Visionaries," this is a comprehensive guide to the industry. It aims to provide information and helpful advice for bankers, fintech entrepreneurs, and investors eyeing profit opportunities in the fintech industry.
 
The material included in "The FINTECH Book" was crowdsourced, mirroring a fintech-related economic trend. It was edited by two leading fintech authorities. Chisti is the chief executive officer of FINTECH Circle, the first angel investor network in Europe to focus on fintech. Barberis is the founder of the SuperCharger, a fintech accelerator based in Hong Kong.
 Amazon 
Many of the products emerging from financial technology provide support services to banks and other traditional financial institutions. However, a number of fintech firms are disruptors within the financial services sector, and such companies are the subject of King’s book.
 
It provides insightful interviews with and stories about fintech entrepreneurs who are at the forefront of providing financial services through nontraditional means and examines phenomena such as the rise of peer-to-peer (P2P) lending and investing robo-advisors.
 
King is a recognized authority on the changing face of banking and finance, the author of several books on technological advances in banking, and in 2012 was voted American Banker’s Innovator of the Year.
 Amazon 
Shevlin's "Smarter Bank" focuses on the ways that the best and brightest traditional banks are adapting to and taking advantage of innovations in financial services.
 
Shevlin describes how these "smarter" banks are embracing the latest technology and adjusting their business models to esh with financial services innovations and a changing financial marketplace. He shows how leading banks are employing fintech products and services to improve customer relationships and bottom-line profitability.
 
The book addresses a broad range of subjects, including innovations in the use of big data, customer engagement, the increasing importance of mobile banking and online payment services, and the financial behaviors of millennials. It is definitely a recommended read for banking executives.
 
Shevlin, a long-time marketing consultant and banking industry analyst, was ranked No. 2 on Bank Innovation’s list of "30 Innovators to Watch: Key Executives Shaping the Industry" in 2014.
