
Thanks to the internet, today's investors have access to real-time fundamental and technical analysis data on which they can base informed investment decisions. In addition to a wealth of information that includes price quotes and historical charts, many financial websites also have communication tools such as RSS feeds, Twitter and Facebook updates, and newsletters to keep investors on top of dynamic market conditions.
 
Below are some of the top websites that allow investors and traders to quickly, easily, and reliably find financial statistics. They are categorized by the sector in which they offer the most data.
 
Investors can find a quick view of the markets at Bloomberg.com/markets. A market snapshot appears at the top of the page showing U.S., European, and Asian market data. Indexes from the Americas, Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia-Pacific regions can be readily accessed.
 
Data for certain futures, commodities, bonds, and currencies are also available. By selecting "Economic Calendar" under the "Market Data" heading, investors can view current and upcoming economic announcements such as the EIA Petroleum Status Report. Delayed price quotes and historical price charts are also provided.
 
Google Finance offers investors real-time quotes, financial news, and international market data at www.google.com/finance. Similar to Yahoo! Finance, Google allows users to find current quotes; research historical data like price charts, splits, and dividends; select technical analysis techniques; and compare different trading instruments.
 
Investors can find company-specific information regarding annual and quarterly financials, key statistics and ratios, external links for analyst estimates, SEC filings (EDGAR Online), and transcripts.
 
Kitco brings real-time market information like price quotes, trends, market commentary, and exchange rates to investors and traders via www.kitco.com. Investors can quickly find real-time price quotes for precious metals, the top-five performing gold equities, and exchange rates on the website's home page.
 
Under the "Charts & Data" tab on the home page, investors can find live, historical, and technical charts for precious metals. In addition to news and usable market data, Kitco has an online precious metals store called Kitco Metals Inc.
 
It is a retailer of precious metals including gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and rhodium. Kitco is also a leading supplier of refining services, labware for mineral analysis, and precision-crafted devices for manufacturing processes.
 
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission's Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval (EDGAR) database provides free public access to corporate information including registration statements, prospectuses, and periodic reports filed on Forms 10-K (audited annual financial statements) and 10-Q (unaudited quarterly financial statements).
 
Investors can also find information regarding recent corporate events including preliminary earnings announcements that have been reported on Form 8-K. Users can access the EDGAR database at www.sec.gov/edgar to search by companies and filings, by all SEC-registered companies in a particular state or country, or with a specific Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. Current and historical EDGAR archives can be researched.
 
Investors can find free real-time quotes, current news, and international market data at www.finance.yahoo.com. Yahoo! Finance's home page shows U.S., European, and Asian market summaries. It also shows currency rates, has a currency converter. The site also lists the day's top stories. Investors have access to real-time price quotes using the "Get Quotes" option on the home page.
 
From here, investors can select from a variety of historical price charts ranging from one day to several decades, with the option to include splits, dividends, and a modest assortment of popular technical indicators. Investors can also compare historical data for two or more stocks by using the "Compare" feature.
 Price charts using relative percentages illustrate the historical performance of the selected instruments. 
XE's focus is on currency services, and investors and traders can find real-time currency quotes, currency news and analysis, currency converters, and a variety of currency calculators at www.xe.com. Users can subscribe to free daily email updates with currency rates, news headlines, and central bank interest rates. XE posts updates on Facebook, and users can also download XE Currency apps for iPad, BlackBerry, iPhone, Android, and Windows phones.
