
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Innovative blockchain technology works without the need for a central authority. Blockchain is the underlying technological foundation of cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum. Dozens of leading financial firms, including Goldman Sachs (GS) and JPMorgan (JPM), are investing heavily in developing the technology. For people who want to learn more about blockchain technology and its applications, here are three of the best books on the subject.
 Amazon  
Burniske and Tatar look at blockchain from a financial perspective, but they also cover key technological concepts along the way. "Cryptoassets: The Innovative Investor's Guide to Bitcoin and Beyond" is written for investors, rather than programmers or Bitcoin enthusiasts. That keeps most of their explanations relevant and comprehensible. Burniske and Tatar start with the origins of Bitcoin during the 2008 financial crisis and cover the basics. They also explain the crucial differences between Bitcoin and broader blockchain technology. The book then goes into detail on the types of cryptoassets that have arisen, such as crypto tokens and crypto commodities.
 Like any new technology, understanding the financial implications of blockchain is often more useful to investors than learning technical details. 
This book also goes far beyond most of the rest of the literature by attempting to define cryptoassets as an asset class. There is even a chapter that takes on the difficult task of developing a valuation framework for cryptoassets. While the market is still too young for any framework to be definitive, Burniske and Tatar deserve praise for laying the necessary foundations. Finally, they also deal with the practical details of blockchain investing. Blockchain wallets, cryptocurrency exchanges, and initial coin offerings (ICOs) are all covered.
 Amazon 
The father and son team of Don and Alex Tapscott have written "Blockchain Revolution" to explain the impact of cryptocurrencies. The fully open platform of blockchain technology will expand and transform what we can do online, the way we do it, and who can participate. According to the Tapscotts, blockchain technology will immensely improve the delivery of expanding financial services and the safeguarding of personal identity information. Blockchain also has benefits for business contracts and the development of the Internet of Things (IoT).
 
The book also discusses the various ways that blockchain technology is changing the future of money, transactions, and business. Don Tapscott, also the author of "Wikinomics," and his son, Alex, an expert on the blockchain, carefully explain the technology. They see it as a simple but transformative protocol that enables financial transactions to be both anonymous and secure through the distributed ledger. The authors recognize that blockchain technology is still in its infancy. They do an excellent job of separating what the technology can actually deliver now from its vast potential for the future.
 Amazon