
Crude oil, or “black gold,” is one of the world's most precious commodities. Price changes in the commodity can affect the economic ecosystem at every level, from family budgets to corporate earnings to the nation's GDP. Indeed, sudden price drops or unexpected spikes can send global financial markets into a tizzy.
 
Crude oil prices change quickly in response to news cycles, policy changes, and fluctuations in the world's markets. Since 2014, oil prices have experienced a downward journey, falling from highs of around $105 per barrel. In February and March of 2020, crude prices accelerated their decline in reaction to the coronavirus pandemic and an expected sharp drop in demand for oil. In addition, major oil producers failed to come to an agreement on production cuts, exacerbating the problem. By mid-March 2020, the price of U.S. crude oil was fluctuating just around $30 per barrel.﻿﻿ So, what causes these dramatic swings in the price of oil, and what can we expect going forward?
 In the Spring of 2020, oil prices collapsed amid the COVID-19 pandemic and economic slowdown. OPEC and its allies agreed to historic production cuts to stabilize prices, but they dropped to 20-year lows. 
For several decades, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) has been the elephant on the world's trading floors, with its oil-producing member nations working together to determine prices by boosting or reducing crude oil production. While OPEC's grip on the market has loosened some in past years, its decisions continue to play a dominant role. OPEC's every move is watched closely by governments, oil companies, speculators, hedgers, investors, traders, policymakers, and consumers.
 
OPEC's policies are affected, in turn, by geopolitical developments. Some of the world's top oil producers are politically unstable or at odds with the West (issues pertaining to terrorism or compliance with international laws, in particular, have been problematic). Some have faced sanctions by the U.S. and the United Nations.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
In the past, supply disruptions triggered by political events have caused oil prices to shift drastically; the Iranian revolution, Iran-Iraq war, Arab oil embargo, and Persian Gulf wars have been especially notable.﻿﻿ The Asian financial crisis and the global economic crisis of 2007-2008 also caused fluctuations.﻿﻿ 
 
The supply crude oil is also determined by external factors, which might include weather patterns, exploration and production (E&P) costs, investments, and innovations.﻿﻿ For example, thanks to advances in technology that allow companies to extract oil from rock—so-called shale oil—the United States became the world's largest producer of oil in 2018 and a major source of global oil supplies.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Strong economic growth and industrial production tend to boost the demand for oil—as reflected in changing demand patterns by non-OECD nations, which have grown rapidly in recent years. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration,
 
Other important factors that affect demand for oil include transportation (both commercial and personal), population growth, and seasonal changes. For instance, oil use increases during busy summer travel seasons and in the winters, when more heating fuel is consumed.
 
More and more, market participants are buying and selling crude oil, not in its physical form, but in the form of contracts. For example, airlines and oil producers use derivatives, like futures and options, to a hedge against swings in the price of oil, while speculators drive those prices upwards or downwards when there are waves of buying or selling amid incoming news.
 
Reports on production figures, spare capacity, target pricing, and investments can be a crucial factor in the setting of crude oil prices. Some of the most keenly followed reports are OPEC's monthly oil report,﻿﻿ International Energy Agency (IEA) oil market report,﻿﻿ and weekly inventory data from both the American Petroleum Institute (API) and the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
Oil has long been the engine of the world's economy, and even today—as the search for alternative energy sources gains ground—life without crude oil is hard to imagine. Carbon-based fuels are used in heavy and light manufacturing, in the production process (chemicals, textiles, detergents, and medicines), and in every sector of our transportation industries. For now, at least, oil companies and oil-rich nations will surely weather dips, deeper plunges, and sudden spikes in crude oil prices.
 U.S. Energy Information Administration. "Spot Prices for Crude Oil and Petroleum Products." Accessed April 30, 2020. U.S. Department of the Treasury. " Sanctions Programs and Country Information." Accessed April 30, 2020. United Nations. "Sanctions." Accessed April 30, 2020. National Bureau of Economic Research. "Historical Oil Shocks," Pages 14-18. Accessed April 30, 2020. National Bureau of Economic Research. "Historical Oil Shocks," Pages 19-23. Accessed April 30, 2020. U.S. Energy Information Administration. "Oil: Crude and Petroleum Products Explained." Accessed April 30, 2020. U.S. Department of Energy. "Office of Oil and Natural Gas." Accessed April 30, 2020. U.S. Energy Information Administration. "The United States Is Now the Largest Global Crude Oil Producer." Accessed April 30, 2020. U.S. Energy Information Administration. "What Drives Crude Oil Prices: Demand Non-OECD." Accessed April 29, 2020. OPEC. "Monthly Oil Market Report." Accessed April 30, 2020. International Energy Agency. "Oil Market Report." Accessed April 30, 2020. American Petroleum Institute. "API'S Weekly Statistical Bulletin." Accessed April 30, 2020. U.S. Energy Information Administration. "Weekly Petroleum Status Report." Accessed April 30, 2020.