
Property deeds are legal documents used in real estate that transfers ownership of real property from a grantor (seller) to a grantee (buyer). Real property is land or anything attached to the land, such as buildings or roads. For a deed to be legally operative, it must include the identification of the grantor and grantee and the adequate description of the property.
 
More specifically, deeds fall in a number of categories, including warranty, quitclaim, and special purpose. This article will define what deeds are, what needs to be included in a deed to make it legally operative, and the different types of deeds that are used in the transfer of real property.
 
A property deed is a written and signed legal instrument that is used to transfer ownership of the real property from the old owner (the grantor) to the new owner (the grantee). Historically, real property was transferred through a ceremonial act known as "livery of seisin." In this act, the person transferring the land handed a twig or clod of turf from the land to the person taking delivery of the land. A verbal or written statement often accompanied the gesture, though it was the livery of seisin that legally transferred the title to the property. Today, the title to real property is conveyed by a paper deed.
 Deeds are either official, meaning they are executed as a result of a court or legal ruling, or more commonly, private, meaning they are executed by a deal struck between individuals or businesses. 
While each state has its own requirements, most deeds must contain several essential elements to be legally valid:
 
Deeds can be classified in numerous ways. Broadly, deeds are classified as official or private. Official deeds are executed pursuant to a court or legal proceedings. Most property transactions, however, involve individuals and business entities using private deeds.
 
Deeds are also categorized based on the type of title warranties provided by the grantor. The different types of deeds include:
 
The general warranty deed offers the grantee the most protection. With this type of deed, the grantor makes a series of legally binding promises (called covenants) and warranties to the grantee (and their heirs) agreeing to protect the grantee against any prior claims and demands of all persons whomsoever in regards to the conveyed land. The usual covenants for title included in a general warranty deed are:
 
Where in a general warranty deed the grantor promises to warrant and defend the title conveyed against the claims of all persons, the grantor of a special warranty deed warrants that they received the title to the property and that they have not done anything while holding the title to create a defect.
 
In other words, only defects that arose during the grantor's ownership of the property are warranted. Due to this limitation, the special warranty offers the grantee less protection than the general warranty deed. Many purchasers of real estate will insist on a general warranty deed to protect against problems that could arise as a result of a special warranty deed.
 
The quitclaim deed, also called a non-warranty deed, offers the grantee the least amount of protection. This type of deed conveys whatever interest the grantor currently has in the property if any. No warranties or promises regarding the quality of the title are made. If the grantor has a good title, the quitclaim deed is essentially as effective as a general warranty deed. However, if the title contains a defect, the grantee has no legal recourse against the grantor under the deed. A quitclaim deed is often used if the grantor is not sure of the status of the title (if it contains any defects) or if the grantor wants no liability under the title covenants.
 
Special purpose deeds are frequently used in connection with court proceedings and instances where the deed is from a person acting in some type of official capacity. Most special purpose deeds offer little to no protection to the grantee and are essentially quitclaim deeds. Types of special purpose deeds include but are not limited to:
 Real property, meaning land or anything attached to the land that is immovable, such as a building, creek, or road, is essentially the same as real estate. 
The transfer of a property's title is made by a deed. Certain essential elements must be contained within the deed in order for it to be legally operative. Different deeds provide various levels of protection to the grantee and the obligations of a grantor are determined by the form of the deed. Since deeds are important legal documents that affect ownership interests and rights, a qualified real estate attorney should be consulted in any transaction involving them, such as the closing of a home purchase.
