
Mitigation banking is a system of credits and debits devised to ensure that ecological loss, especially loss to wetlands and streams resulting from various development works, is compensated by the preservation and restoration of wetlands, natural habitats, and streams in other areas so that there is no net loss to the environment. To mitigate means to reduce the severity of something. In this case, mitigation banking is reducing the damage caused to the environment.
 
According to the Ecological Restoration Business Association (ERBA), "mitigation banks are highly regulated enterprises that have historically been proven to deliver the highest quality, most reliable offset to environmental impacts...and a private investment into 'green infrastructure' to help offset the impacts associated with economic growth."﻿﻿
 
A mitigation bank is a site developed for such a purpose, whereas the person or entity undertaking such restoration work is referred to as a mitigation banker. Just as a commercial bank has cash as an asset that it can loan to customers, a mitigation bank has mitigation credits that it can eventually sell to those who are trying to offset mitigation debits. Generally, these purchasers of mitigation credits are individuals or entities undertaking commercial projects.
 
There are two types of mitigation banks:
 
The mitigation banker, after purchasing an environmentally damaged site that they wish to regenerate, works with regulatory agencies such as the MBRT (Mitigation Banking Review Team) and the CBRT (Conservation Banking Review Team) that approve plans for building, maintaining and monitoring the bank.
 
These agencies also approve the number of mitigation credits that the bank may earn and sell with a particular restoration project. These mitigation credits may then be bought by anyone who plans to undertake commercial development on or near a wetland or stream that will in the process negatively impact the ecosystem of that region. The mitigation banker is responsible for not just the development, but also the future upkeep and maintenance of the mitigation bank.﻿﻿
 
The US EPA (the United States Environmental Protection Agency) has defined four distinct components of a mitigation bank:
 
The Clean Water Act (CWA) was passed in 1972. Section 404 and two other provisions of the CWA made it compulsory to avoid and minimize the impact on designated water bodies and provide compensatory mitigation for unavoidable impacts. Below is a chronological breakdown:
 
Mitigation banking aids in protecting nature and its diversity. The impact of increasing industrialization and urbanization on natural habitats, streams, and wetlands is inevitable. Mitigation banks provide an opportunity to at least partially offset this impact.
 
A mitigation bank is more efficient in that it ensures that a vast consolidated piece of land is recovered or conserved to offset the adverse impact of developers on a lot of small sites. The economies of scale and technological expertise of a mitigation bank make it more efficient not just in terms of cost, but also in terms of the quality of restored acreage.
 
It is easier for developers to buy credits from an approved bank than to get regulatory approvals that might otherwise take months to procure. As mitigation banks have already restored units of affected acreage in the process of earning credits, there is little to no time lag between the environmental impact at a service area and its restoration at a bank site.
 
The system of mitigation banking effectively transfers the liability of ecological loss from the developer (also called permittee) to the mitigation banker. Once the permittee buys the required credits as per regulations, it becomes the responsibility of the mitigation banker to develop, maintain, and monitor the site on a long-term basis.
 
Currently, there are a number of mitigation banks approved in the United States. According to the Regulatory In-lieu Fee and Bank Information Tracking System (RIBITS), developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), as of May 2020 there were over 1,900 approved banks. ﻿﻿
 
The foremost challenge to the success of mitigation banking is the difficulty encountered by regulatory agencies in correctly assessing ecological loss in economic or monetary terms. The credits offered to mitigation banks have to be appropriately priced and evaluated by regulators, but although these agencies make use of a number of environmental assessment techniques, it is not an easy task to fully capture the economic impact of such damage caused to natural resources.
 
It is also questionable whether the natural habitats and wetlands that took centuries to evolve can be artificially engineered in a span of just a few years. In some cases, the quality of such artificially developed wetlands in terms of floral and faunal diversity has been found to be sub-standard, compared to their natural counterparts.
 
It is also believed that mitigation banks, as opposed to individual mitigation where developers create their own mitigation sites in the vicinity of acreage destroyed, tend to be located far from the sites of impact, and hence cannot fully replicate the site impacted.
 
Mitigation banking is a system by means of which the liability of ecological damage is transferred from the permittee to the mitigation banker through a system of credits and debits under regulatory guidelines. A mitigation banker develops, restores, preserves and manages the acreage at a bank site and earns mitigation credits, which are then sold to a permittee or developer for a fee.
 
This system, despite some of its limitations such as the lack of robust environmental assessment techniques and poor quality of natural diversity in some cases, still has a lot of advantages. With increasing private investment in the development of mitigation banks and research on ecosystems as well as easing regulatory controls, the future for mitigation banking is indeed bright both for investors and for nature.
 Ecological Restoration Business Association (ERBA). "ERBA Tips on Congressional Outreach." Accessed May 12, 2020. United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). "Permit Program under CWA Section 404." Accessed May 12, 2020. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). "Federal Guidance for the Establishment, Use and Operation of Mitigation Banks." Accessed May 12, 2020. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. "Mitigation Banks Under CWA Section 404." Accessed May 12, 2020. National Archives and Records Administration. "Federal Register: Compensatory Mitigation for Losses of Aquatic Resources; Final Rule." Accessed May 12, 2020. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). "Clean Water Laws, Regulations, and Executive Orders Related to Section 404." Accessed May 12, 2020. RIBITS. "Banks and ILF Sites." Accessed May 12, 2020.