
Initial public offerings (IPOs) have become one of the most exciting events on Wall Street after the dotcom heyday created more paper millionaires than any other time in history. Even though IPOs continue to dominate the press, many small investors are instead beginning to discover the vast opportunities available in delistings, which are the opposite type of transaction.
 
Delistings occur when companies decide to delist their stock from stock exchanges in a move to privatize or simply move to the over-the-counter (OTC) markets.
 
This process occurs in one of two ways:
 
Companies may decide to deregister for a variety of reasons that can be either good or bad for shareholders.
 
A few of the most common reasons include:
 
Delistings may make sense for companies, but how can the average investor take advantage of the situation? Well, the best opportunities are found in companies that voluntarily delist to go private and cash out their shareholders. Typically, this is because management is confident that the company is undervalued or could save substantial money by operating as a private enterprise. These efforts to cash out shareholders can often yield substantial returns to investors willing to do a little homework.
 
The key to this strategy is finding instances where tiny companies are trying to "cheat" the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SEC mandates that companies file paperwork if they choose to go private, but can avoid the extra efforts if they have fewer than 300 shareholders. Consequently, small companies often issue large reverse stock splits to reduce their number of shareholders and pay off the remaining shareholders holding less than that amount with cash compensation.
 
Fortunately, many institutional investors avoid these stocks due to the lack of liquidity and risk associated with these deals. However, small shareholders can often net a handsome profit from the strategy.
 
For example, let's say company XYZ issued a 600:1 reverse stock split and then repurchased its shares at $5. Incredibly, shares traded at $4.24, well below the repurchase price after the stock split. This occurred despite the plan to privatize, which was being considered as a result of the stock's lack of liquidity and the fact that it wasn't covered heavily by any institutions. Not many individual investors would turn down nearly 18 percent gains in a matter of weeks!
 
Shareholders may also find other opportunities in obscure payoffs offered in privatization deals. Sometimes, companies will offer rights offerings, warrants, bonds, convertible securities or preferred stock to entice shareholders to tender their shares in a move to privatize. Unfortunately, many of these offers are restricted to larger shareholders who are able to bargain more effectively.
 
All significant corporate events must be recorded in filings with the SEC. As a result, investors can quickly find delisting opportunities in SEC filings that are publicly available through SEC's EDGAR database.
 
Delistings are found in three types of SEC filings:
 
In the end, delistings can provide profitable investment opportunities or lose major money for shareholders. Everything depends on the motivations behind the privatization, the size of the company and terms of the offer. Investors willing to invest the time and effort to find and research opportunities may uncover some gems for their portfolios that can perform extremely well in the short term.
