
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Wealthsimple and Betterment are very closely matched robo-advisors that are great options for investors. Both Wealthsimple and Betterment have features that appeal to less experienced investors, with plenty of planning tools and zero opening balance requirements. We’ll look at some of the key differences in terms of goal-setting support, portfolio options, and fees, to help determine which robo-advisor is the best fit for your investment dollars. 
 
Both Wealthsimple and Betterment have solid goal-setting capabilities.
 
During account setup, Wealthsimple clients can select goals during account setup that include homeownership, retirement, education, long-term growth, and income. A single account can include multiple goals, offering greater sophistication and diversification if needed. You can review transactions and relative performance statistics, subdivided by goals, on account management pages.
 
Betterment offers the ability to work with five main types of investing goals: retirement savings, retirement income, safety net, general investing, and major purchase. The platform has very easy-to-follow steps for setting a goal, and each one can be monitored separately. It displays asset allocation for each goal in a ring with equities in shades of green and fixed income in shades of blue. If you’re falling behind on meeting a goal you’ve set, Betterment will encourage you to put more aside. This can be a helpful prompt, particularly for young investors who may not yet feel the urgency to save for their longer-term goals.
 
Both Wealthsimple and Betterment offer a few options for retirement accounts, including traditional and Roth IRAs, SEP IRAs, and 401(k) rollovers.
 
At Wealthsimple, users with less than $100,000 in assets have access to a slider tool that projects how much they’ll have in savings at retirement age, based on their current savings rate. The site also highlights how much more you would have in retirement if you boost your savings by proposed amounts. Wealthsimple Black customers—those with $100,000 or more in assets—have access to one-on-one counseling with financial advisors over the phone.
 
Betterment collects a variety of information about your retirement—what your dream retirement looks like, how much you have saved, and what you’ve got in external accounts. This last one is important as many investors have multiple retirement accounts and getting a consolidated picture can be challenging. Betterment takes all this data and then projects your retirement income and provides a plan to get there. Betterment will prompt you when it’s advisable to save more or to move money around to save on fees. As you near retirement, the platform will recommend changes you can make to optimize your savings. For retirement questions, basic Digital members can pay $199 to $299 for a one-time consultation with a certified financial planner, while Premium customers have unlimited access to CFP professionals.
 
Wealthsimple and Betterment both offer the typical accounts that investors look for in a robo-advisor. Wealthsimple also offers Uniform Gifts to Minors (UGMA) and Uniform Transfers to Minors Acts (UTMA) accounts. If you are looking specifically for these types of custodial accounts, then Wealthsimple has the edge.
 
The only features that matter are the ones you will use, but Wealthsimple and Betterment both have some compelling ones. With Wealthsimple the Roundup feature with linked credit and debit accounts is a clever and painless way to increase your investments without really trying. Betterment, for its part, uses the syncing up of your external accounts to offer better guidance to you on your goals. Both robo-advisors offer their clients savings accounts with decent interest rates. 
 
When it comes to fees, there is a significant gap between Wealthsimple and the basic tier of Betterment.
 
Wealthsimple charges a 0.50% fee—among the highest in our robo-advisor group—which includes all investment advice, portfolio management, and trade costs. The fee drops to 0.40% for accounts at or above $100,000. The Wealthsimple Cash program is free. The average ETF management fees run about 0.2%.
 
Betterment offers two different fee options: digital customers pay 0.25% of their portfolio annually, with the option to pay $199 to $299 per call to access a certified financial planner. Premium customers pay 0.40% annually with unlimited access to CFPs. The ETFs that make up most of the portfolios have average expense ratios of .11%.
 
Betterment and Wealthsimple have taken the same approach to minimum deposits and the barrier they may pose to investors with limited capital. Neither platform requires a minimum. 
 
Wealthsimple offers a simple start-up process. Clients must answer a series of questions about financial goals, time horizon, risk tolerance, past investment experience, and investment knowledge, plus bank information for bank verification. The platform promises that your account will be functional within five business days, and creates—based on your input—a suggested portfolio and ETF list. Portfolios are divided into three generic categories. Clients can change proposed allocations, but the platform may push back if alterations conflict with prior responses. You can fund your account via one-time payments or recurring deposits.
 
Betterment boasts one of the easiest accounts to set up. Just input your age, retirement status and answer a few questions about your income and investment goals. There are none of the standard risk-related questions. Instead, Betterment presents you with an asset allocation suggestion and its associated risk, which you can adjust by changing the percentage of equity versus fixed income held in the portfolio. Betterment’s suggested portfolios are fully transparent prior to funding, including access to fund prospectuses. You’re also prompted to connect external accounts—such as bank and brokerage holdings—to your Betterment account, both to provide a complete picture of your assets and to make cash transfers into a Betterment investment portfolio easier.
 
Wealthsimple portfolios are built of ETFs only, although the fine print mentions that Canadian customers may also receive mutual funds. The platform lists just 10 ETFs, divided into different asset categories. Each portfolio may include 6 to 7 instruments, suggesting that most customization is done through percentage changes rather than ETF selection.
 
Betterment’s portfolios are constructed from ETFs from iShares and Vanguard. Betterment offers five portfolio types:
 
Overall, Betterment and Wealthsimple both invest client funds in ETFs.
 
Clients at Wealthsimple can choose a socially conscious portfolio that excludes non-qualified ETFs, and a screenshot of that portfolio contains just five “green” funds. (Others may be undisclosed.) The company also offers a Halal account that complies with Islamic law, buying pre-screened stocks but no ETFs or fixed income products. Fractional rebalances occur after deposits, withdrawals, and other asset-level changes. Clients can’t request rebalancing or make changes to ETFs, but client profile changes trigger a portfolio rebalancing when risk scores change.
 
Betterment accounts are evaluated regularly and rebalanced if they’ve shifted from their goal allocation. Betterment clients can switch strategies after a portfolio is funded, and the platform will alert you if there are tax implications prior to making a change. Each goal can be invested in a different strategy, so funds for longer-term goals like saving for retirement can be allocated to one of the higher risk portfolios while shorter-term goals, such as funding a down payment on a house, can be allocated to the lower-risk ones.
 
While Betterment offers a fund geared toward socially responsible investors, the advisor’s focus on ETFs makes it difficult to achieve a fully SRI mix. Outside of the ETFs invested in large-cap firms and an emerging market ESG fund, very little of the portfolio is invested in firms that meet “socially responsible” criteria.
 
There are a variety of ways to efficiently invest money to avoid excessive taxes. Tax-loss harvesting is the selling of securities at a loss to offset a capital gains tax liability and it is the most common way for robo-advisors to address the tax issue.
 
At Wealthsimple, tax loss harvesting is automatic for Wealthsimple Black customers—who have net deposits of $100,000 or more in their accounts.
 
However, all Betterment clients are eligible for tax-loss harvesting on all taxable in-house accounts, regardless of the balance. You must opt into the service in your account settings, and then it will be applied to all of your portfolios within your Betterment account.
 
Both Betterment and Wealthsimple have sufficient security and are nearly identical in this respect. Their websites are encrypted and two-factor authentication is available. Both firms hold client funds with Apex Clearing Corporation, providing access to Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC) insurance and excess insurance. Standard SIPC coverage insures against losses due to failed brokerages for up to $500,000.
 
Betterment has the edge on Wealthsimple when it comes to customer service.
 
At Wealthsimple, there is no contact link or information on the main website, but an FAQ provides a phone number and email address. Customer service is available from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. (Eastern) Monday through Thursday or from 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. on Fridays. Calls during business hours reached a customer rep within one minute. Robo-advisor office addresses are listed on the About page without phone numbers.
