
We publish unbiased product reviews; our opinions are our own and are not influenced by payment we receive from our advertising partners. Learn more about how we review products and read our advertiser disclosure for how we make money.
 
Wells Fargo’s brokerage, WellsTrade, is intended to serve Wells Fargo Bank customers who want the convenience of managing their investments at the same institution where they have checking accounts and mortgages. WellsTrade was late to the zero commission pricing movement but finally joined the pack in December 2019, dropping commissions for listed stocks and ETFs to $0. 
 
Investors who prioritize analyst research and sell-side recommendations may also find what they are looking for at WellsTrade. However, in both cases, very active investors looking for low costs and high-quality tools will be disappointed.
 
WellsTrade is designed for infrequent, buy-and-hold investors who are not particularly interested in asset classes besides equities. WellsTrade clients can trade stocks, ETFs, mutual funds, fixed income, and single-leg options. It’s a fit for you if you’re a U.S. resident with other financial relationships with parent bank Wells Fargo. One advantage to having an investing account if you’re already doing business with Wells Fargo is that moving money from one account to another is extremely simple.
 No commissions for stock and ETF trades Easy-to-use website and mobile app A single app gives you access to all Wells Fargo accounts Limited research offerings outside of proprietary Wells Fargo analysis Households with under $250,000 in WellsTrade accounts may pay a $30 annual fee Quotes do not stream 
Getting started with a new account is relatively simple. New customers can quickly sign up for a new account on the WellsTrade website or mobile app and most can provide their signatures electronically. You may have to print out some forms and mail them in, which will delay the opening of your account. If you already have a relationship with Wells Fargo, personal details are automatically filled in on your application. There are a few additional hoops through which to jump to receive options and margin approval. One upside to using a bank-based online broker is the incredible ease of moving cash from one account to another, both on the browser and mobile app.  
 
The web-based platform is easy to navigate but it’s very slow. Most of the account functions, research tools, and order entry can be found under two-level menus. Upon logging in, the first page you see is an overview of all your brokerage accounts with balances and a chart displaying your asset allocation. Customization is limited to setting up account groups and to changing out the data displayed on your portfolio listing.
 
Order tickets are not ubiquitous; you will have to make a few clicks or taps on the menus to open one. The mobile app is essentially the same experience as the web version, scaled to fit the device.
 
Investors can enter orders for stocks, single-leg options, ETFs, and mutual funds very easily. WellsTrade does not offer conditional order types such as one-triggers-another, but investors can use standard limit, market, and stop orders. The order entry process is simple but manual and could become very repetitive for active investors. Orders can be started from watchlists or screener results. The WellsTrade platform is web-based and it takes a while to navigate from one page to the next, which makes the order entry process tedious. One nice touch is that investors can make tax lot choices while entering an order. 
 
Only single-leg option orders can be made online. When opening a long stock position, you’ll have to make a separate transaction to create a covered call or protective put. If you’re a regular spread trader, this is not the broker for you as you will have to call a broker to make those trades as a single order. There is a $25 additional fee to place an order through a live broker.
 
Placing a trade on a mobile device is very similar to the web order entry experience. To easily close a position and avoid making errors, it’s best (especially on mobile) to start from your Positions page and then tap on the Trade link.
 
WellsTrade provides no access to futures, futures options, crypto, or forex trading. For passive investors, there is a wide selection of no-transaction-fee mutual funds and an acceptable mutual fund screening tool. 
 
WellsTrade clients can place market, limit, or stop-limit orders online. There are no conditional orders available. Market-on-open and market-on-close orders can be placed with a live broker only.
 
WellsTrade does not publish information about how orders are routed. The firm does not characterize its order router as a “smart” router but manages to attain approximately $0.01 per share in price improvement on equity orders. WellsTrade does not accept payment for order flow for marketable equity orders. The firm receives $0.15 per contract in payment for order flow on options orders, which is below the industry average.
 
WellsTrade’s commissions are mostly in line with the rest of the industry. There are two notable exceptions: the high fee for trading penny stocks and the base fee for trading options.  
 
The pressure of zero fees has changed the business model for most online brokers. In lieu of commissions, the way brokers make money from you is less obvious—as are some of the subtle ways they make money for you.
 
The landing page for asset screening lets you look for stocks, ETFs, mutual funds, and bonds. You can search the mutual fund list for socially-responsible investments, but not stocks or ETFs. WellsTrade offers a recommended list for mutual funds that is updated regularly. The bond screener allows you to search through the available inventory for a bond that fits your specific needs, but trades must be made with a live broker. 
 
The screening tools at WellsTrade are fairly standard, albeit basic, compared to others in the industry. Though limited in functionality, it is convenient to be able to create a trade ticket from the search results list. When you find a stock or ETF you want to learn more about, the detailed information is presented as an overlay to the page you’re viewing, so when you close the overlay you’re back where you started. Options chains are shown on a detail page, but there is no options screener.  
 
Market news is provided by Reuters, and most of the research in the WellsTrade platform is created by internal Wells Fargo analysts. We found the research reports, market commentary, and investment recommendations to be above average compared to the industry. Investors focused on long-term holdings will likely appreciate access to much of the sell-side research provided by WellsTrade. You can follow a specific Wells Fargo analyst if you find one that fits your investing profile.
 
The WellsTrade portfolio analysis tools are surprisingly robust. Investors can see charts, wheels, and tables that break down the holdings in their portfolio by asset class. Performance reports are easy to access and very detailed and can be customized to show a particular period. The account landing page upon login presents a view of the entire household, which can be customized as desired. The portfolio listing can be customized as well, and you can define up to five different views. Additional detail is provided as you drill down, and can go to the individual transaction level. 
 
The asset allocation wheel lets you compare your portfolio to a variety of asset allocation models. There’s a to-do list available that tells you what transactions you’d have to make to match your desired allocation model.
 
There are some portfolio analysis tools missing, though. You cannot consolidate accounts from other financial providers to give you a more complete picture of your household's assets. WellsTrade customers cannot estimate the tax impact of a proposed trade, and there are no tax reporting tools. The platform also lacks a trading journal.
 
The education tools are light to nonexistent, outside of FAQ pages and other brief snippets.There are no videos at all, and the articles are short and lacking detail. New investors who struggle with basic investing concepts won’t find much help. There’s little help for navigating the WellsTrade platform and tools. For example, investors with limited experience screening for stocks are unlikely to be able to navigate the screening tools on their own. 
