
Gold mines and gold deposits are often categorized by the average proportion of gold contained in the ore at the site. This is also known as the ore grade.﻿﻿ While higher-quality mines have higher ore grades, lower-quality mines have lower grades. When gold ore has a high grade, it takes relatively less effort to extract an ounce of gold from the ground and, since less ore has to be dug out, it reduces the input costs for the gold mining company.﻿﻿
 
All precious metals are graded by the proportion of metal in the ore. Grams per tonne of milled ore, or g/t, is the most common metric used to represent the grade of ore. The value of a precious metals mine is determined by its total estimated weight, the grade of the ore, and how difficult it is to extract and distribute.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Precious metals are found in a wide range of geological sites. They show up in open pits, underground, under bodies of water, and in single nuggets resting on the ground.﻿﻿ Grading is usually only applied to open pits and underground deposits.
 
The official standards of high-grade or low-grade gold ore today are set by the World Gold Council, which is a non-profit organization that was established to promote the use of gold and gold products internationally. In addition to marketing and supporting gold producers, the World Gold Council also researches gold mines and creates standards by which to evaluate gold mining prospects.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Another, less common definition of grading refers to the concealment of precious metals ore by workers who have mined it. This definition had greater applicability and was used more frequently during the late 19th century, when so-called high-graders would often hide gold ore in their lunch pails. To combat this problem, mining companies often required their employees to open their lunch pails, turn out their pockets, and shower following their shifts.﻿﻿
 
The World Gold Council defines a high-quality underground mine as having a gold ore density between 8 and 10 g/t, while a low-quality underground mine has a gold ore density of 1 to 4 g/t.﻿﻿ Open-pit mines tend to have a lower grade, but they can be considered very valuable because of the lower average operating costs necessary to obtain them. ﻿﻿ The council recommends using cost per ounce, not gold ore grading, to evaluate a gold mine.
 
Using the World Gold Council's g/t standard, many of the world's high-grade gold mines are in the United States, Russian, and Peru. The Fire Creek mine in Battle Mountain, Nev., for example, was reported to have one of the highest at 44.1 g/t. Others making the list include the Macassa mine in Canada, the Kedrovka mine in Russia, and the Toguraci mine in Indonesia.﻿﻿
 National Mining Association. "Facts About Coal and Minerals." Accessed May 8, 2020. Peleton Minerals Corporation. "Gold Mining, Simply Put," Pages 11-12. Accessed May 8, 2020. World Gold Council. "Processing, smelting and refining gold." Accessed May 8, 2020. Queens University. "Cut-off grade estimation." Accessed May 8, 2020. World Bank. "Digging Beneath the Surface An Exploration of the Net Benefits of Mining in Southern Africa." Accessed May 8, 2020. Mining.com. "The world’s highest grade gold mines." Accessed May 8, 2020. USGS. "Mineral Commodity Profiles—Gold," Pages 13-18. Accessed May 8, 2020. World Gold Council. "Who we are." Accessed May 8, 2020. World Gold Standards. "What we do." Accessed May 8, 2020. Otis E. Young, Jr., Otis Young, Robert Lenon. "Western Mining: An Informal Account of Precious-Metals Prospecting, Placering, Lode Mining, and Milling on the American Frontier from Spanish Times to 1893," Pages 222-224. University of Oklahoma Press, 1977. USGS. "Mineral Commodity Profiles—Gold," Pages 18-19. Accessed May 8, 2020.