
The terms "bear" and "bull" are often used to describe general actions and attitudes, or sentiment, either of an individual asset or the market as a whole. Investors use the terms "bearish" or "bullish" as a quick way to describe their market sentiment regarding specific securities or financial markets.
 
A bear market refers to a decline in prices, usually for a few months, in a single security or asset, group of securities, or the securities market as a whole. In contrast, a bull market is when prices are rising. Typically, a move of 20% or more from a recent peak or trough triggers an "official" bear or bull market.
 
While the terms are relatively simple to understand, the impact either a bull or bear market can have on your portfolio and wealth is undeniable. Both animals are known for their incredible and unpredictable strength, so the image that each evokes in regards to stock market volatility certainly rings true.
 
Interestingly enough, the actual origins of these expressions are unclear. Here are two of the most frequent explanations given:
 
According to Merriam Webster, the term "bear" came first:
 
Over time the name "bearskin jobber" was shortened to just "bear," and the definition was expanded to include the financial markets, which used "bear" to describe a speculator selling stock. One of the earliest references of the term "bear" used to describe a marketplace transaction came in 1709 from Richard Steele, publisher of the British literary and society journal, The Tatler. In an essay, Steele defines a "bear" as an individual who places a real value on an imaginary object and thus is said to be "selling a bear."﻿﻿
 
This negative image of the bear continues in Daniel Defoe's The Political History of the Devil published in 1726. In the book, Defoe writes "...every dissembler, every false friend, every secret cheat, every bear-skin jobber, has a cloven foot."﻿﻿
 One of the worst bear markets in U.S. history was precipitated by the stock market crash of 1929, which led to the Great Depression and a bear market that lasted almost three years. 
In contrast, when used to discuss the financial markets, the term "bull" has a much more positive connotation than "bear." A bull market and a bull (or "bullish") speculator refers to speculative purchases made with the expectation of an increase in stock prices.
 
This relationship to speculation seems to have at least partial origins from the gruesome blood sports of bull and bear-baiting. These contests began in medieval times around the 1200s and reached their height of popularity during the Elizabethan era. People would flock to the events and gamble on the outcomes, betting vast sums of money on a contest featuring a bull or a bear. It's not hard to see how this corresponds to the usage of the terms in today's stock market speculations.
 
Shakespeare's plays make reference to battles involving bulls and bears. In Macbeth, the ill-fated title character says his enemies have tethered him to a stake but "bear-like, I must fight the course." In Much Ado About Nothing, the bull is a savage but noble beast:
 Merriam Webster Dictionary. "The History of 'Bull' and 'Bear' Markets." Accessed August 21, 2020. Open Source Shakespeare. "Much Ado about Nothing." Accessed August 21, 2020.