
A relative newcomer to the automotive sector, Tesla, Inc. (NASDAQ: TSLA), headquartered in California, is an auto manufacturer and energy storage company quickly becoming known for its electric car design. It also markets automotive and home battery products.﻿﻿ Tesla is a publicly traded company.﻿﻿ Tesla obtained a lot of attention and free publicity when it produced the first electric sports car, the Roadster.﻿﻿ Its next product was the Model S, an electric luxury car.﻿﻿
 
The Roadster was the first electric car to implement the use of lithium-ion batteries, as well as the first electric model to have a cruising range of over 200 miles.﻿﻿ The limited cruising range before recharging has been one of the major criticisms of electric cars, as most gasoline-powered vehicles have a cruising range of around 410 miles.﻿﻿
 
Concerned about competitors either obtaining inside information or buying out necessary parts, Tesla is rather secretive about the more than two dozen parts suppliers for the Model S, but many of them have been uncovered by diligent researchers. Tesla manufactures the basic electric components of the car – the electric motor, the battery pack and the charger – but other parts come from suppliers spread across the U.S., Europe and Asia.
 
Below is a list of some of the purported key suppliers for Tesla's manufacturing production, along with the components they supply:
 
Other alleged suppliers include ADAC, ABC Group, Angell-Demmel, Argent, Gentex, Harada, Hitachi Cable America, Hope Global, MacLean-Fogg, Magna International, Methode Electronics, Multimatic, Panasonic, Plastomer, PSM International, Riviera, T1 Automotive, Zanini Auto Group, TXU Corp., Universal Logistics Holdings, Inc., Affinia Group Intermediate Holdings Inc., Lithium Exploration Group, Inc., U.S. Lithium Exploration Group, Inc., Niocorp Developments, Ltd., Rare Element Resources, Ltd., Burlington Northern Sante Fe Corp., Cooper Industries, Ltd., Clarcor, Inc., Dana Corporation, DELPHI CORPORATION, Flowserve Corp., NextEra Energy, Inc., Harman International Industries Inc., Lightwave Logic, Inc., Molex Inc., Metaldyne Performance Group Inc., Nortek, Inc., ROHM AND HAAS COMPANY, Searchlight Minerals Corp.
 
Still, more rumoured suppliers include: Integrys Holding, Inc., Titanium Metals Corp., Thomas & Betts Corporation, Curaegis Technologies, Inc., Findex Com Inc., Vystar Corp., Liquidmetal Technologies Inc., Sense Technologies Inc., Omnitek Engineering Corp., Puradyn Filter Technologies Inc., Hammer Fiber Optics Holdings Corp., Amerityre Corp., Zap, Telkonet Inc., CDTI Advanced Materials, THT Heat Transfer Technology Inc., Zoom Telephonics Inc., Seachange International Inc., IEH Corporation, Arc Group Worldwide, Emcore Corp, CUI Global Inc., NI Industries Inc., Perma-pipe International Holdings Inc., UFP Technologies Inc., Applied Optoelectronics Inc., Paragon Offshore PLC, Universal Stainless & Allow Products Inc., Deswell Industries Inc., Trecora Resources, Core Molding Technologies Inc., Supreme Industries Inc., Neophotonics Corp., Harmonic Inc., CECO Environmental Corp., KMG Chemicals Inc., Gorman Rupp Co., DMC Global Inc., Avid Technology Inc., China Automotive Systems Inc., CSW Industrials Inc., Proto Labs Inc., Aaon Inc., Voxx International Corporation, Strattec Security Corp., CTS Corp., Bel Fuse Inc., Haynes International Inc., Pam Transportation Services Inc., Jason Industries Inc., and Handy & Harman Ltd.
 Tesla. "About Tesla." Accessed March 22, 2020. Nasdaq. "TSLA." Accessed March 22, 2020. Tesla. "Tesla Motors Begins Regular Production of 2008 Tesla Roadster." Accessed March 22, 2020. Tesla. "Tesla Motors to Begin Customer Deliveries of Model S on June 22nd." Accessed March 22, 2020. Tesla. "Tesla Roadster Travels 313 Miles on a Single Charge." Accessed March 22, 2020. Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy. "Fact #939: August 22, 2016 All-Electric Vehicle Ranges Can Exceed Those of Some Gasoline Vehicles." Accessed March 22, 2020.