
When investors contact brokers, they are often surprised by the number of requests for personal information. The broker is just complying with the law. Certain required information must be obtained before a broker can make any trades on behalf of a client.
 
Broker-dealers in the U.S. are required to record a Tax Identification Number (TIN) for their clients, and this number is usually a Social Security Number (SSN). However, there are several other ways for non-U.S. citizens to supply a TIN. In many cases, a valid passport number, an alien registration card number, and other government-issued ID numbers (such as a driver's license number) can be used.﻿﻿
 
Brokers don't ask investors for their personal information to make conversation. There's a perfectly good reason behind it—they have to ask.
 
Tax compliance is one reason that brokers need personal information. Investors need to report capital gains, losses, and dividends to the IRS. It follows that brokers must have this data in order to send the required forms each year.
 
According to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), there are three other reasons why brokers are required to ask for personal information. They are suitability, record-keeping requirements, and anti-terrorist / anti-money laundering (AML) laws.﻿﻿
 
Suitability refers to how an investor's financial situation matches the advice and recommendations that are given by a broker. A broker must attempt to understand an investor's circumstances and preferences.﻿﻿ The broker should then provide recommendations that are suitable for that person and their investment objectives. A broker who does not do that violates rules laid out by the National Association of Securities Dealers.﻿﻿
 
Relevant information includes an individual's risk tolerance, financial goals, the amount of debt an investor owes, the number of years to retirement, and net worth. A good broker will tailor advice to particular situations. If a broker advises you to take any action in direct contradiction of your financial goals and circumstances, you might even have grounds for legal action.
 
Rules set out by the SEC require brokers to maintain a current record of personal information. The essential information the broker must seek includes the client name, Tax Identification Number (TIN), net worth, and account investment objectives. If the client refuses to provide this data, the broker is excused from following the rule. However, the broker must be able to prove that an effort was made to obtain and document the information.﻿﻿
 
Keep in mind that some of this information may change. It is the investor's responsibility to volunteer information to update the record. Still, a broker may ask for updates on an annual basis. Address changes may be of particular importance because the investor will receive a prospectus and other information for each investment.﻿﻿
 
Finally, the broker must provide client information to meet anti-money-laundering and anti-terrorist financing requirements. The minimum requirements for this section include:
 
This information allows the broker to verify the client's identity. The client's personal data is cross-checked against lists of known or suspected terrorists.﻿﻿
 
These requirements can create issues for misidentified individuals and victims of identity theft. An identity check in such a case may reveal that an identity has been stolen and is being abused for money laundering purposes. Before visiting a broker, it is a good idea to review credit reports for signs of unusual activity. There are also services that monitor Social Security Numbers to spot potential theft.
 
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) has a list of other personal information a broker may ask when opening an account. While not required, it suggests that investors pass these details on so the firm can better serve their trading and investment needs:
 
Some brokerages have traditional offices, which means that investors are able to supply confidential information in person. Transferring data in person can reduce the risk of identity theft.
 
When trading online, investors are often required to give up personal information through the trading platform or app.
 
However, due diligence remains crucial online. Just as with any traditional broker, investors need to know who is getting their information. Read up on the brokerage's background and check out reviews to see if it is legitimate. Beware of fake apps and online platforms designed to harvest personal information. Legitimate apps will usually have a large number of users and reviews. 
 Internal Revenue Service. "U.S. Taxpayer Identification Number Requirement." Accessed June 21, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Broker-Dealers: Why They Ask for Personal Information." Accessed Sep. 8, 2020. FINRA. "Top NASD Rule Violations." Accessed Sep. 8, 2020. FINRA. "4512. Customer Account Information." Accessed Sep. 8, 2020.