
The Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 requires large companies to file a report before completing a merger, acquisition or tender offer. Enacted by President Ford as a set of amendments to existing U.S. antitrust laws, such as the Clayton Antitrust Act, the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act requires parties to notify the Federal Trade Commission and Department of Justice of large mergers and acquisitions before they occur with the filing of an HSR Form, also called a "Notification and Report Form for Certain Mergers and Acquisitions," and generally known as a "premerger notification report." The report is meant to alert regulators to the intent of companies to merge so they may perform a review of the action based on antitrust laws. 
 
The Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 is also known as the "HSR Act" or Public Law 94-435.
 
Once the companies have filed the required PNR forms, a waiting period begins. The waiting period is usually 30 days, but for cash tender offers or an acquisition in bankruptcy it is 15 days. The transaction can proceed if the waiting period ends or if the government terminates the waiting period early. If regulators see a potential anticompetitive problem with the proposed transaction, they will request additional information from the companies involved and extend the waiting period or seek an injunction to prevent the transaction.
 
Under the HSR Act, the following premerger tests must be met to require a premerger filing:
 
As of 2019, the base filing threshold for the HSR Act which determines whether a transaction requires a Premerger Notification is $90 million. The statutory size-of-person threshold is between $18 million and $180 million. Alternatively, the statutory transaction size test that applies to all transactions even if the "size-of-person" threshold is not met is $359.9 million. 
 
Filing fees for an HSR Form depend on the size of a transaction. For example, transactions worth $90 million or above but under $180 million require a filing fee of $45,000. Transactions valued at over $180 million but under $899.8 million come with at $125,000 filing fee. And transactions valued at over $899.8 million have a HSR Form filing fee of $280,000.
