
The University of Iowa Tippie College of Business is the business school at the University of Iowa in Iowa City, Iowa. Founded in 1921, it offers both undergraduate and graduate programs.
 
Prior to 2019, the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business was well-known for its Master of Business Administration (MBA), which had been rated as the best finance-focused MBA program in the world by the Financial Times in 2016. In 2019, the school graduated its final cohort of full-time MBA students, although it continues to offer a Professional MBA program for those wishing to pursue their MBA on a part-time basis.
 
Previously known as the University of Iowa College of Commerce, the school became known as the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business in 1999, following a naming gift by the entrepreneur and philanthropist, Henry B. Tippie.
 
Today, the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business is home to over 4,000 students, including 3,000 undergraduate students and 1,500 students in graduate-level programs. The college's 450 faculty members maintain dedicated research centers in subjects such as accounting, economics, and finance. The school is also home to the famous Iowa Electronic Markets (IEM), which is a leading research institution for the study of prediction markets.
 
In addition to offering undergraduate majors in the core business disciplines of accounting, economics, finance, and marketing, the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business also offers a professional MBA program designed for students wishing to complete their MBAs while continuing to advance their careers. Although this program is offered at four locations throughout the state of Iowa, additional programs are available for those wishing to study remotely or abroad. This includes an online MBA program, as well as international MBA programs based in Italy and Hong Kong.
 
Graduate students who don't want to pursue an MBA can choose to do a Master of Accountancy (MAc) degree, a Master's and Certificate in Business Analytics, or a Master of Finance.
 
Students attending the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business can benefit from a wide range of dedicated research institutions located at the Iowa City campus. In addition to the IEM, which studies and develops prediction markets, this network includes other influential institutions in areas such as marketing, small business development, and investment banking.
 
Examples of such institutions include the Small Business Development Center, which supports student entrepreneurs with business model development and various aspects of entrepreneurial training; the Vaughan Institute, which provides training on risk management for both corporate finance and insurance applications; and the Hawkinson Institute, which is focused on investment banking.
