
Real property is land and any property attached directly to it, including any subset of land that has been improved through legal human actions. Examples of real properties can include buildings, ponds, canals, roads, and machinery, among other things. In land law, where the term is most commonly used, real property also entails the right of use, control, and disposition of the land and its attached objects.
 
Real property, sometimes referred to as real estate, realty or immovable property, is composed of any designated portion of land and anything permanently placed on or under it. The elements on or under the land can include natural resources and/or human-made structures.
 
In the legal sense, owning real property involves the bundle of rights transferred from seller to buyer upon the sale of a property. These rights typically dictate the use, transfer and/or sale of real properties. These real estate rights include the right of possession, control, exclusion, enjoyment, and disposition.
 
Different types of estates, which are recognized by law, further define the real estate rights associated with property ownership. The kind of estate depends on the terms of the lease, deed, will, land grant and/or bill of sale through which the estate was received.
 
Modern law makes a clear distinction between real property (examples of real property include land and anything affixed to it) and personal property (clothing, furniture, money, etc.). Property that cannot be separated from what is considered real property would be considered wholly real property.
 
Since real property is land and anything that is immovable upon it, there can be somewhat of a grey area when it comes to real estate. The definition of real estate is "property in buildings and land," which makes it real property. However, there are some legal issues that can take place when a landowner decides a piece of real property does not apply to the sale price of real estate or vice versa.
 
Every U.S. state, except Louisiana, has specific real property laws governing real property and the estates they include. These laws apply to land, as well as anything that is fixed to the land, such as buildings or attached equipment. In some states, whatever lies under a plot of land is part of that real property. In other states, whatever lies beneath, or passes through, a property may be subject to different laws, with separate ownership. This could include ore, precious gems, metals, and even water.
 
To be legitimate, a claim to any real property must be accompanied by a verifiable and legal property description. Such a description usually makes use of natural or manmade boundaries, such as seacoasts, rivers, streams, the crests of ridges, lakeshores, highways, or purpose-built markers such as cairns, surveyor's posts, fences, and official government surveying marks.
