
The resource curse, or resource trap, is a paradoxical situation in which countries with an abundance of non-renewable natural resources experience stagnant economic growth or even economic contraction. The resource curse occurs as a country begins to focus all of its production means on a single industry, such as mining or oil production, and neglects investment in other major sectors.
 
As a result, the nation becomes overly dependent on the price of commodities, and the overall gross domestic product becomes extremely volatile. Additionally, government corruption often results when proper resource rights and an income distribution framework are not established in society, resulting in unfair regulation of the industry. The resource curse is most often witnessed in emerging markets following a major natural resource discovery.
 
The resource curse gets its name from the binary way in which it affects an economy. Most often the problem is seen in less developed countries with relatively concentrated and undiversified industrial sectors. Once a natural resource is discovered, available investment capital tends to gravitate to this industry. The new industry becomes a source of economic growth and relative economic prosperity, as jobs and disposable income that were previously absent become available.
 The resource curse is also known as the "paradox of plenty." 
The curse comes from the fact that this new industry that is bringing economic prosperity begins to negatively impact other parts of the economy by diverting available means of production and investment only to the new industry itself. The concentration of capital, labor, and economic resources to a single industry can leave countries vulnerable to a downturn in that industry. Countries with more diversified economies tend to weather global economic cycles better than countries with concentrated economies.
 
The resource curse is a perfect example of the idiom "too much of a good thing." This is particularly the case with oil-producing countries like Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela. Saudi Arabia recently announced a new economic plan called Saudi Vision 2030 intended to diversify its economy away from the oil industry and break its resource curse.
 
A commonly cited example of the resource curse is the Dutch disease, a situation that occurred in the Netherlands following a large natural gas find. The steps of the Dutch disease include:
 
Both the Dutch disease and the resource curse have a paradoxical impact on the overall economy following the discovery of large natural resource reserves.
