
The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) is a federal law that protects consumers when they transfer funds electronically including the use of debit cards, automated teller machines ATMs, and automatic withdrawals from a bank account. Among other protections, EFTA provides a way to correct transaction errors and limits the liability resulting from a lost or stolen card.
 
In 1978, Congress passed the Electronic Fund Transfer Act—also known as Regulation E—in response to the growth of ATMs and electronic banking and the Federal Reserve Board implemented it. EFTA established rules to protect consumers and defined the rights and responsibilities of all participants involved in transferring funds electronically. ﻿﻿
 
Rulemaking authority under EFTA migrated from the Fed to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 2011 following the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.﻿﻿
 
Electronic fund transfers are transactions that use computers, phones or magnetic strips to authorize a financial institution to credit or debit a customer’s account. Electronic transfers include the use of ATMs, debit cards, direct deposits, point-of-sale (POS) transactions, transfers initiated by phone, automated clearinghouse ACH) systems, and pre-authorized withdrawals from checking or savings accounts.﻿﻿
 
The Electronic Fund Transfer Act outlines requirements for banking institutions and consumers to follow when errors occur. Under EFTA, consumers can challenge errors, have them corrected, and receive limited financial penalties. EFTA also requires banks to provide certain information to consumers and defines how they can limit their liability in the case of a lost or stolen card.﻿﻿
 
The use of paper checks has steadily declined since the Electronic Fund Transfer Act was passed, but checks continue to serve as hard evidence of payment. The explosion of electronic financial transactions created a need for new rules that would give consumers the same level of confidence as they have in the checking system. This includes the ability to challenge errors, correct them within a 60-day window, and limit liability on a lost card to $50—if the card is reported as lost within two business days.﻿﻿
 
However, if the institution is notified within three to 59 days, the liability could be as much as $500. If a lost card is not reported within 60 days, the consumer is not protected from liability and could forfeit all funds in the associated account, and be responsible for paying any overdraft charges.﻿﻿
 Gift cards, stored-value cards, credit cards, and prepaid phone cards are excluded from EFTA. 
Basic services that are protected under EFTA include:﻿﻿
 
EFTA authorizes 24-hour access to ATMs.
 
Most banks offer direct deposit, which allows you to pre-authorize deposits (such as payroll checks or government benefits) or recurring bill payments (such as mortgages, insurance payments, or utility bills).
 
You may authorize your financial institution to make payments or transfer funds via telephone. Banks are required to confirm your identity by asking account-specific questions.
 
You can access your accounts via financial institutions’ online portals to monitor your accounts, transfer funds, and pay bills.
 
Debit cards issued by financial institutions let consumers make purchases online or at a retail store or business.
 
This feature enables a business to convert a paper check into an electronic payment by scanning the check and capturing the bank name, address, account number, and routing number. After the paper check is scanned into an electronic payment, it becomes null and void.
 You have the right to stop pre-authorized transfers at any time, regardless of any opposing contract terms. 
EFTA requires financial institutions and any third party involved in electronic fund transfer services to disclose the following information to consumers:﻿﻿
 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. “Electronic Fund Transfers (Regulation E); Amendments.” Accessed June 20, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. “§ 1005.3 Coverage.” Accessed June 20, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. “§ 1005.11 Procedures for Resolving Errors.” Accessed June 20, 2020. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. “§ 1005.31 Disclosures.” Accessed June 20, 2020.