
The equity multiplier is a financial leverage ratio that measures the portion of the company’s assets that are financed by stockholder's equity. It is calculated by dividing a company's total asset value by total shareholders' equity. The equity multiplier is also known as the leverage ratio or financial leverage ratio and is one of three ratios used in the DuPont analysis.
 
Investment in assets is key to running a successful business. Companies often finance these assets through the process of issuing equity and debt. The equity multiplier reveals how much of the total assets are financed by shareholders' equity. Essentially, this ratio is a risk indicator in that it shows how leveraged the company is to investors.
 
A higher equity multiplier (relative to historical standards, industry averages, or its peers) indicates that a company is using a high amount of debt to finance assets, which means more financial leverage for the company. Companies with a higher debt burden will have higher debt servicing costs which means that they will have to generate more cash flows to sustain optimal operating conditions.
 
A low equity multiplier implies that the company has less debt-financed assets, which is usually seen as a positive as its debt servicing costs are lower, but it could also mean that the company is unable to entice lenders to loan money, which would be a negative.
 
There is no "correct" equity multiplier as it will vary by the sector or industry a company operates within. However, an equity multiplier of 2 means that half the company's assets are financed with debt, while the other half is financed with equity.
 
The equity multiplier is also an important factor in DuPont analysis, which is a method of financial assessment devised by DuPont Corp. for the purpose of internal review. The DuPont model breaks the calculation of return on equity (ROE) into three ratios—net profit margin (NPM), asset turnover ratio, and the equity multiplier.
 
If ROE changes over time or diverges from normal levels for the peer group, the DuPont analysis can indicate how much of this is attributable to financial leverage. If the equity multiplier fluctuates, it can significantly affect ROE. Higher financial leverage (i.e. a higher equity multiple) drives ROE upward, all other factors remaining equal.
 
The equity multiplier calculation is relatively simple and straightforward. Consider Apple's (AAPL) balance sheet at the end of the fiscal year 2019. The company's total assets were $338.5 billion, and the book value of shareholder equity was $90.5 billion. The company's equity multiplier was therefore 3.74 ($338.5 billion / $90.5 billion), which can be compared with its equity multiplier for 2018, which was 3.41.
 
From 2018 to 2019, Apple increased its assets (up from $365.7 billion in 2018) while seeing a decline in shareholders' equity ($107.1 billion in 2018).﻿﻿
 
As another example, consider Verizon Communications (VZ), which operates with a very different business model than Apple, which includes more financial leverage. The company's total assets were $291.7 billion for the fiscal year 2019, with $62.8 billion of shareholder equity. The equity multiplier was 4.64 ($291.7 billion / $62.8 billion), based on these values.﻿﻿
 
Verizon's much lower proportionate shareholder equity value indicates that the business relies heavily on financing from debt and other interest-bearing liabilities. The company's telecommunications business model is more reminiscent of utility firms, which have stable, predictable cash flows and typically carry high debt levels.
 
On the other hand, Apple is more susceptible to changing economic conditions or evolving industry standards than utilities or large traditional telecommunications firms. As a result, Apple carries less financial leverage. Differences in business models mean that higher financial leverage does not necessarily indicate superior financial health.
 Apple. "2019 Form 10-K," Page 31. Accessed Aug. 27, 2020. Verizon. "2019 Form 10-K," Page 76. Accessed Aug. 26, 2020.