
Oil reserves are an estimate of the amount of crude oil located in a particular economic region. Oil reserves must have the potential of being extracted under current technological constraints. For example, oil pools situated in unattainable depths would not be considered part of the nation's reserves. Reserves are calculated based on a proven/probable basis.
 
Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, and Canada have some of the world’s leading oil reserves. British oil company BP Plc (BP) estimated that the world had 1.73 trillion barrels of oil reserves as of 2018, which would be sufficient to meet 50 years of global production at 2018 levels. 
 
According to BP’s 2019 Statistical Review of World Energy report, Venezuela is the leading country in terms of oil reserves, coming in at 300.3 billion barrels. Saudi Arabia is a close second with 297.7 billion and Canada is third with 167.8 billion. Meanwhile, the U.S. is in the top ten with 61.2 billion barrels, putting it 9th on the list. Here are the world’s top 10 largest oil reserves by country as of 2018:
 
 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) says the world has 1.5 trillion barrels. It estimates that OPEC countries hold 79.4% of the world’s reserves, which includes seven of the world’s top 10 largest oil reserve countries—Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, and Libya. 
 
BP’s Statistical Review of World Energy is one of the leading sources of energy market data and information, dating back several decades. Another source is the World Oil Review supplied by the Italian oil company ENI SpA. Similar to BP's statistical review, ENI's publication provides details about global oil reserves. The U.S. EIA is a leading authority for more information about U.S. oil reserves dating back to 1900.
 
One of the critical ratios analysts use to measure the longevity of reserves is the Reserve-to-Production Ratio (R/P), which is a measure of the number of years a reserve base will last at current annual production rates. Companies operating in the oil industry, as well as oil-producing countries, use this measure. This chart from BP reveals two significant trends in global oil reserves. 
 
World's Reserves-to-Production (R/P) Ratios by Year
 
The first and most obvious is the massive increase in South and Central American oil reserves relative to production since 2006 when Brazil made some significant oil finds in their offshore pre-salt basins. BP currently estimates that the South and Central America region has enough oil reserves to last for 136 years at current production levels.
 
However, the volume of oil reserves does not necessarily translate into production figures. For example, Venezuela's share of the overall oil production market has crashed in recent years due to internal strife. According to the 2019 P Statistical Review of World Energy, the South American nation accounted for just 1.6% of overall production volumes despite having the world's largest oil reserves.
 
The other important data is the persistent downtrend in Middle Eastern oil reserves relative to production. In the 1980s, Middle Eastern countries had R/P ratios similar to what South and Central America enjoy today. Over the last 30 years, this ratio has consistently deteriorated as production rates increase and reserves become harder to find. Reserves-to-production for the Middle East now stands at roughly 80 years. 
 
A similar, yet not as pronounced, trend of a downward sloping R/P is happening to the U.S., which as aggressively increased production over the last several years. The R/P for the U.S. is roughly 30 years. 
