
Stocks trading over-the-counter is organized into three groups. The OTCQB, also called "The Venture Market," is the middle tier. It was created in 2010 and consists of early-stage and developing U.S. and international companies that are not yet able to qualify for the OTCQX.
 
To be eligible, companies must be current in their reporting, undergo annual verification and certification, meet a $0.01 bid test, and may not be in bankruptcy. Companies listed here report to a U.S. regulator such as the SEC or FDIC. The fees for listing on OTCQB markets is $12,000 per annum, with a one-time application fee of $2,500.
 
The OTCQB replaced the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)-operated OTC Bulletin Board (OTCBB) as the main market for trading OTC securities that report to a U.S. regulator. As it has no minimum financial standards, the OTCQB includes shell companies, penny stocks, and small foreign issuers.
 
The over-the-counter or OTC market is a decentralized market where securities not listed on major exchanges are traded directly by a network of dealers. Instead of providing an order matchmaking service like the NYSE, these dealers carry inventories of securities in order to facilitate any buy and sell orders.
 
The OTCQB marketplace is run through OTC Link, an inter-dealer quotation and trading system developed by OTC Markets Group. OTC Link is registered with the SEC as a broker-dealer and also as an alternative trading system (ATS). OTC Link enables broker-dealers to not only post and disseminate their quotes, but also negotiate trades through the system’s electronic messaging capability. This feature enabled it to effectively replace FINRA’s OTCBB, which was a quotation-only system.
 
All broker-dealers that trade OTCQB, OTCQX and OTC Pink securities have to be FINRA members and registered with the SEC; they are also subject to state securities regulations.As with exchange-traded securities, investors trading OTC securities are protected from an unethical broker-dealer’s illegal practices by the same SEC/FINRA rules such as Best Execution, Limit Order Protection, Firm Quotes, and Short Position Disclosure.
 
Companies trading on the OTCQB must follow standards to improve transparency and exclude companies that are most likely to be associated with stock promoters and other shady operators. And while stocks trading in the OTCQB have many of the same protections as more established, larger stocks, they are still considered to be more speculative penny stocks. There is also no guarantee that stocks trading in the OTC market are of higher quality than penny stocks trading on different OTC tiers or even different OTC marketplaces. As such, traders would be well served to implement strong due diligence before committing their capital.
