
Podcasts have exploded in popularity over the past several years. In fact, 44% of Americans say they have listened to one at some point, according to a 2018 study by Edison Research.
 
Popular podcast This American Life attracts more than 2.5 million downloads per episode, which surpasses the program’s 2.2 million listeners across 500 terrestrial radio stations. Many of these listeners tune in for the wide range of programming as well as the flexibility to listen at any time.
 
Financial advisors may want to consider adding some podcasts to their media lists to keep on top of the latest industry trends and grow their practice. Often times, advisors will subscribe to these podcasts and listen to their favorites during their morning commutes, on the way to client visits, or during lunch hours. The information on these podcasts can provide insights into both the markets and ways to improve their own business.
 
Here's a list of popular podcasts for financial advisors:
 
This popular podcast by Michael Kitces is aimed at financial advisors and focuses on helping investors learn more about the financial services industry. There have been nearly 100 episodes and the program usually features an interview with a guest, often from the industry. Topics range from how to best run an advisory to creating effective marketing and sales strategies.
 
Tortoise Capital Advisors’ QuickTake podcasts cover current events through interviews with financial experts. The podcast is a great way to gain insights that go beyond the headlines of the markets. The podcasts are usually pretty short—clocking in at 15 minutes or less in most cases—which makes them easy to listen to during a break at work or on your commute home.
 
National Public Radio’s Planet Money podcast is a staple in the personal finance community with its fun and informative programming. The long-running series has discussed everything from shell companies to tax tips to how quantitative easing works. While some topics may be too basic for financial professionals to learn much from, advisors often find them to be useful as topics of conversation and also an entertaining listen.
 
Radical Personal Finance is a podcast that aims to provide a comprehensive curriculum of financial knowledge. Financial adviser Joshua J. Sheats helps listeners with a series of practical tips and tricks to work towards your plan for success. One recent episode focused on learning important lessons from your previous financial failures. Another focused on the value of building retirement wealth through Roth IRAs.
 
Investing Sense is a podcast series that combines a financial planner and an everyday investor who sit down to talk about important financial and retirement issues that affect the investing industry. Topics range from IRAs to dealing with the ups and downs of the market.
 
Podcasts are a great way for financial advisors to keep on top of their industry and learn valuable techniques to grow their practice. With a rapidly growing number of high-quality programs becoming available, advisors may want to consider listening to a podcast during their commute or lunch hours.
