
Compiling a list of famous women financial advisors is no easy task. There are a handful of recognizable financial journalists: Liz Pulliam Weston, Jean Chatzky, Tess Vigeland, Michelle Singletary, Farnoosh Torabi and Jane Bryant Quinn. Yet, when it comes to famous financial advisors, the list of well-known women advisors is slim.
 
The two most recognizable female financial advisors are Suze Orman and Mellody Hobson. Yet, there are many other female financial advisors and planners doing quite well and whose names lack household recognition.
 
Orman and Hobson are media darlings and financial professionals. Orman started out as a stockbroker while Hobson rose through the ranks at Ariel Investments to become its co-CEO.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Suze Orman is a Certified Financial Planner (CFP)﻿﻿ and one of the most recognizable financial gurus in the country. Her financial empire includes books, calculators, tools and a resource center. Her one-stop financial planning empire covers every area of one's financial life, offering everything from a debt eliminator and expense tracker tool to various estate planning tools and an insurance evaluator kit. According to her website, Orman’s business involves media appearances and live events rather than individual client consultations.
 
Orman has written many popular personal finance books. These include:
 
Mellody Hobson is Chairman of the Board of Trustees and co-CEO and president of Ariel Investments, a Chicago-based mutual fund company and investment management firm.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ The company focuses on investing in undervalued small- to medium-sized companies.﻿﻿
 
In addition to her work at Ariel, she's been a financial contributor to Good Morning America’s money segments and appears regularly on CBS News as a market commentator and economic trends analyst.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ She’s also a fierce advocate for African American financial literacy. In 2015, Hobson made the prestigious Time Magazine list of 100 most influential people in the world.﻿﻿
 
The following financial advisory celebrities may be less known to the general public but are famous in their field. These star financial advisors were among Barron's Top 100 Women Financial Advisors for 2019.
 
Karen McDonald of Morgan Stanley was ranked number one by Barron's in the 2019 survey.﻿﻿ She has more than $75 billion of assets under management and directs a team of 14 that serves more than 55,000 client households. She has more than 40 years of investment experience.﻿﻿
 
Susan Kaplan is the president of Kaplan Financial Services in Newton, Massachusetts. She has more than $2 billion of assets under management with a minimum account size of $1.5 million. Her average client has an $11 million net worth. Kaplan has an MBA in finance and is a Certified Financial Planner. She’s been a participant in Louis Rukeyser’s Wall Street and Louis Rukeyser’s Mutual Fund publications as well as many other financial journals. Her media presence includes Bloomberg News, CNBC, WGBH and more.﻿﻿
 
Gillian Yu of Morgan Stanley Private Wealth Management in San Francisco holds the number five spot on the 2019 Barron’s list.﻿﻿ Yu’s total assets under management are $6.5 billion with a minimum account size of $10 million. Her clients average a $100 million net worth. Yu is licensed as both a financial advisor and a broker. Born and raised in Taiwan and fluent in English, Mandarin and Taiwanese, she's able to serve international clients with ties to Asia as well as U.S.-based entrepreneurs.﻿﻿
 
Elaine Meyers consistently ranks in the top 10 of Barron's list of top women financial advisors, coming in at number nine in 2019 and number eight in 2018.﻿﻿ She is a Managing Director and Financial Advisor with J.P. Morgan Securities, focusing on wealth management strategies for executives, technology founders and Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. In 2019, her assets under management were more than $3 billion. Her clients have an average net worth of $300 million. Meyers has several decades in the financial advisory field with prior experience at other international investment firms.﻿﻿
 
Although most famous women financial advisors aren’t well known in celebrity circles, their accomplishments are noteworthy. Managing billions of dollars for corporations and the wealthy, they educate as well as invest for their clients. And while the total number of women in the industry is low, this list of accomplished women clearly highlights their talents and ability to thrive in a traditionally male-dominated field.
 Barron's "America's Top Women Advisors." Accessed June 15, 2020. Barron's. "Karen McDonald." Accessed June 15, 2020. Barron's. "Susan Kaplan." Accessed June 15, 2020. Barron's. "Gillian Yu." Accessed June 15, 2020. Barron's. "Elaine Meyers." Accessed June 15, 2020. Suze Orman. "Suze's Story." Accessed June 15, 2020. Ariel Investments. "Executive Leadership." Accessed June 15, 2020. Suze Orman. "Retirement Planning." Accessed June 15, 2020. Suze Orman. "The Money Book for the Young, Fabulous & Broke." Accessed June 15, 2020. Suze Orman. "You’ve Earned It, Don’t Lose It." Accessed June 15, 2020. Suze Orman. "The Laws of Money, The Lessons of Life." Accessed June 15, 2020. Ariel Investments. "Mellody Hobson." Accessed June 15, 2020. Ariel Investments. "About Ariel." Accessed June 15, 2020. Ariel Investments. "Ariel Investments ESG Policy." Accessed June 15, 2020. ABC News. "'GMA' Quick Tip: How to Start Investing." Accessed June 15, 2020. CBS News. "Mellody Hobson." Accessed June 15, 2020.