
The basic requirement for being a financial advisor is knowledge in the areas of finance in which they practice, but true professional competency requires much more. In fact, financial advisors must wear many hats to do their jobs effectively, and those considering this field as a career should learn about what the day-to-day lives of advisors are really like.
 
Anyone who works in the financial industry can tell you that the first step to becoming a successful advisor is to obtain a sound education in the mechanics of whatever aspect of finance in which you intend to work. This can be a bachelor’s or master’s degree in some cases, a professional certification such as the certified financial planner designation, or just a license or two for those who wish to focus on a specific type of financial product. But your real education in this field won’t even begin until you have started your financial advisor career.
 
The average financial advisor’s day usually begins early and often runs into evening hours, especially for those who are new in the industry. The daily schedule of a typical advisor usually will include the following:
 
As you would expect, the other—and most important—element of any financial advisor’s job is building and managing client relationships. This begins with creating a professional impression during the prospecting phase, delivering what you promise during the planning phase and keeping in touch with them on an ongoing basis. And of course, this can be a real challenge at times—for example, when a client who has been disinherited by their parents calls you and screams that he or she will sue you because of it, even though you could not have been less involved. Your ability to educate clients and convince them to do the right thing will substantially impact your overall success, and potential liability, in this business.
 
And clients aren’t the only people you will need to keep on your side. You will have to learn how to talk to and negotiate with wholesalers, compliance officers, regulatory officials and customer service representatives who may or may not be in the mood to help or work with you when you need it. Your ability to maintain their goodwill can mean the difference between a major inconvenience and lost business and a smooth-running practice.
 
If you feel like you could use some help in preparing for some of the elements described above, you may want to consider taking a few additional courses or classes in behavioral finance or psychology, listening and communication skills, and public speaking. If you are going into business for yourself as an independent advisor, then some training in how to be an entrepreneur may not hurt either. A good place to start is to talk to some advisors who take the same approach you would like to and are succeeding at it. Ask them exactly what kinds of less tangible skills they use in their daily work and how they learned them. There is a rapidly growing pool of free online courses that cover every topic imaginable available to those who wish to learn, and this can be a cheap and convenient place to start the alternative segment of your education.
 
Your job as a financial advisor is going to encompass a great deal more than managing investment portfolios or closing sales. Prospecting, marketing, customer service, compliance, administration, and education also will be part of your daily routine, and your ability to effectively integrate these things into your schedule can ultimately determine your level of success in the business. For more information and resources on becoming a financial advisor, visit the Financial Planning Association, the National Association of Personal Financial Advisors or the CFP Board. (For related reading, see "Financial Advisor Career: Pros and Cons")
