
A currency strategist is a financial professional who evaluates economic trends and geopolitical moves to forecast price changes and directions in the foreign exchange (FX) market. Mostly, a currency strategist has the same job as a financial analyst. However, they focus on predicting the value of foreign currencies to the U.S. dollar instead of only analyzing in-nation trends.
 
Other names for this type of job include forex market analyst and currency researcher. ​​​​​​
 
A forex currency strategist will work for a forex brokerage company. They perform research and analysis and may write market commentary about the forex market and the economic and political issues that affect currency values. These professionals use technical, fundamental and quantitative analysis (QA) to inform their opinions and must be able to produce high-quality content very quickly to keep up with the fast pace of the forex market. Both individual and institutional traders use this news and analysis to inform their trading decisions.
 
Currency strategists will be well-versed in economics, international finance, and international politics. They should have a bachelor's degree in economics or finance. They will also need a background of at least one year working as a trader in the financial markets and may be an active forex trader. Communication and presentation skills are desirable in any job but are particularly crucial for a strategist who will need to communicate complex information to investors of all levels.
 
Although the basics of what a currency strategist does might sound relatively straightforward, there is a lot that goes into how they make their analysis and what they do with that information. Currency Strategists come from a variety of different backgrounds. They may prepare currency reports that take into account factors such as economic trends, geopolitical moves, changes in heads of state, official statements and other foreign developments that affect what businesses need to know before making financial decisions and recommending trade transactions.
 
For example, a currency analyst can work with other financial officers to make predictions about foreign markets and how conditions such as outside factors, market fluctuations, and world events will affect the value of foreign currencies to the U.S. dollar. A currency analyst can then work with companies to help them determine if a potential investment is too risky or a profitable move. The information about the foreign currency value can also help guide a business performing operations overseas. A currency analysis is a key team player in a company involved in international business.
 
A currency strategist performs research to make forecasts about currency movements by identifying and monitoring the driving factors of the currency markets. Occasionally, these strategists will make appearances on financial news networks to give commentary on currency issues. Opinions produced by respected currency strategists are regularly used by individual and institutional traders to assist with trading decisions.
