
Financial advisors and planners who want to transform their practices and take them to the next level should consider a professional coaching program. These programs teach advisors the practices and methodologies used by the industry’s most elite businesses that can help turn things around or boost an already successful practice.
 
Here, we discuss just three popular coaching programs include those from CEG Worldwide, The Oechsli Institute, and Carson Group.
 
CEG Worldwide LLC is a California-based coaching company founded by CEO John Bowen in 2000. The company offers a variety of solutions for financial advisors through one-on-one coaching, corporate workshops, and digital tools.
 
The company's flagship program is Breaking Through, an intensive one-year coaching program that aims to make advisors more successful in their practices. It focuses on helping advisors in five areas: entrepreneurship, confidence, focus, purpose, and approach.
 
Every month for a year, advisors receive individual coaching calls from industry experts to help advisors take action on step-by-step strategies. There are also four specialized webinars throughout the course of the year to guide advisors through their individual plans. CEG also provides weekly emails, an e-learning website, and peer coaching. In addition, participants attend three intensive two-day workshops at the company’s headquarters.
 
CEG claims advisors who go through the program can increase revenue and client service quality while having a more manageable work-life balance. Advisors who have completed the program claim the methods work and have shifted the core of their practices for the better.
 
The Oechsli Institute is one of the most widely used coaching companies by financial advisors. Created in 1978 by founder Matt Oechsli, The Oechsli Institute conducts annual research on affluent investors and successful financial professionals. The organization shares those results throughout its coaching programs.
 
The company's coaching program has no set time frame, though The Oechsli Institute claims that the most successful advisors have been enrolled for at least three years.
 
The program offers one-on-one coaching sessions every two weeks via phone or web conference, on-demand coaching, unlimited access to instructional and informational webinars, online tools, and access to the company's research findings. It starts with an elite advisor assessment, which helps the institute match the right coach to the advisor.
 
The program is customizable based on the services the advisor would like to receive, and the curriculum is broken down into three segments: relationship marketing, relationship management, and digital presence.
 
Ron Carson, founder and CEO of Carson Wealth, launched Peak Advisor Alliance in 1993 to share his insights on how to grow a financial advisory practice. In 2017 it was rebranded as Carson Group.
 
Carson Group is purely based on digital coaching through video conferencing. The coaching program differentiates itself by offering personalized direction and a tailored growth plan. Instead of following a specific schedule or curriculum, advisors begin with an introductory discovery call. The coaches start by listening to the challenges advisors face in their practices. Once a personalized plan is in place, the company formulates scheduled coaching consultations.
 
Carson Group offers a do-it-yourself style model with digital resources in addition to the coaching. It also offers partnership services that help with marketing, consulting, technology, investment outsourcing, and compliance.
