
Aside from the random element of luck, much of what makes some people successful involves the cultivating of certain habits. Learning what these habits are and how to employ them in your own life is worthwhile.
 
To that end, here are 10 of the most often-cited habits of successful people.
 
One of the most frequently mentioned habits of those who are successful in life is organization. Such organization includes planning as well as setting priorities and goals.
 
Joel Brown, the founder of Addicted2Success.com, calls for a prioritized “To-Do List” every evening before going to bed to prepare for the next day.﻿﻿
 
According to Twitter co-founder Jack Dorsey, Sunday is an important day for organization “getting ready for the rest of the week.” ﻿﻿
 
It’s interesting to note that relaxing – by meditating or simply avoiding distractions – is another of the most-often mentioned habits of successful people.
 
Of course, relaxation comes more easily to those who are organized, so perhaps for some, it is more of a natural byproduct than a conscious decision.
 
It may also be that the act of “taking a breath” is the successful person’s way of preparing for the effort yet to come. In fact, one of the first steps toward achieving a meditative or relaxed state is to concentrate on your own breathing for three to five minutes. 
 
Third on the list of habits of successful people is the inevitable “action” habit. It is important to organize, to plan, and to set priorities, but without action, a plan is nothing more than potential.
 
Successful people act – quickly and often. In addition, although it may sound counterintuitive, according to James Clear, they act (start, anyway) before they feel ready.﻿﻿ While others come up with reasons not to act, successful people take that all-important first step – even if it seems outlandish.
 
Personal care with regard to diet, exercise, and hygiene comes next on the list of habits of those who are successful.
 
For some, personal care involves a complex regimen and a highly disciplined lifestyle. For others, not so much. Elon Musk, the CEO of Tesla Motors, put it succinctly when asked what daily habit has had the largest positive impact on his life. In a, Musk said simply, “Showering.” ﻿﻿
 
According to many successful people, having a positive attitude is not just a result of being successful – it’s one of the root causes of success.
 
Joel Brown refers to gratitude and positive self-talk as priorities in the lives of the ultra-successful. Moreover, Brown says, it’s not enough to express gratitude and a positive attitude. You must also remind yourself why you are grateful in order to achieve a deeper effect. ﻿﻿
 
Successful people know the value of exchanging ideas with others through networking. They also know the value of collaboration and teamwork – all of which are likely when you network.
 
Successful people know the importance of surrounding themselves with other successful people, according to author Thomas Corley. Corley says 79% of wealthy people spend at least five hours a month networking.﻿﻿
 
Frugal is not the same as stingy. Frugality is a habit of being thrifty, with money and resources. It is also a habit of being economical. Learning to be economical comes through avoiding waste, which automatically results in efficiency.
 
Successful people avoid overspending. Instead, they comparison-shop and negotiate. The result is financial success through the simple act of saving more money than they spend. 
 
The more time one can devote to being successful, the more likely success will result. Successful people are accustomed to rising early, and that habit appears repeatedly among those who do well in life.
 
While the “Early Riser’s Club” has a huge membership among successful people, a few notable members include Sir Richard Branson of Virgin Group, Disney CEO Robert Iger and former Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Whether through donating to charity or the sharing of ideas, successful people have a habit of giving. They know the value of sharing and most believe their success should result in something more than the accumulation of wealth for themselves.
 
Some of the most well-known successful philanthropists include Bill and Melinda Gates, Oprah Winfrey and Mark Zuckerberg.
 
Lack of wealth does not need to be a factor when it comes to sharing. Volunteering in your community or at a local school does not cost anything but could provide help where it is needed most, as KeepInspiring.Me points out.
 
It's important to note that successful people read. While they also read for pleasure, most use their reading habit as a means to gain knowledge or insight.
 
For anyone who needs inspiration about the value and importance of reading, look no further than the example of billionaire author, J.K. Rowling, who says she read “anything” as a child. She advises, “Read as much as you possibly can. Nothing will help you as much as reading.”﻿﻿
 
Most people have habits – some are positive, some are not. Successful people tend to have more of the kinds of habits that contribute to their success.
 
The good news, for those who wish to be successful, is that cultivating positive habits takes no more effort than developing bad ones.
 
Some of the best habits of successful people involve only conscious effort, like getting up early every day. Others, such as becoming organized, may take a little more skill and practice but ultimately result in the most desired outcome of all – success.
 Entrepreneur. "7 Million-Dollar Habits of the Super Successful." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Techonomy. "Jack Dorsey on Working for Two Companies Full-Time." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. James Clear. "Successful People Start Before They Feel Ready." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Medium. "Top 10 Elon Musk Productivity Secrets for Insane Success." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Joel Brown. "The 7 Million Dollar Habits." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Rich Habits Blog. "The Power of Your Network." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Business Insider. "19 Successful People Who Barely Sleep." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Masterclass. "Using Your Time Effectively." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Virgin. "My (usual) daily routine." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020. Garrison Keillor. "The Writer's Almanac for July 31, 2018." Accessed Oct. 3, 2020.