
Akio Mimura (b. Nov 2, 1940) is a prominent Japanese businessman who served as chairman and president of Nippon Steel Corp.
 
Akio Mimura has a long and impressive history among the Japanese business and financial industries. He spent decades working his way up through the corporate world until he attained the top realms of leadership positions. He eventually reached an elite level of prominent Japanese business executives. He would also serve in high-ranking posts in many Japanese and global boards and committees.
 
Immediately after graduating from the University of Tokyo, Mimura began working at what was then known as Fuji Iron & Steel in 1963. He was 22 years old at the time. He gradually rose up the corporate ladder, holding an assortment of positions, most of which related to marketing and sales. Along the way, he also earned an MBA from Harvard Business School.
 
He proved very successful in these roles, and continued to rise to higher positions within the company, obtaining the title of Managing Director in 1997.
 
Akio Mimura became Executive Vice President of Nippon Steel Corporation in April 2000. He was then named president of the company in 2003 and became chairman in 2008. He earned the distinction of being the company's first chief executive to meet with foreign investors outside of Japan. He has also held prominent leadership roles with major steel organizations such as the Japan Iron and Steel Federation and the World Steel Association.
 
Most recently, he served as Senior Advisor and Honorary Chairman at Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation. He also served as the chairman of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry. In addition, he held the position of Chairman of the Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committee. As a reward for his efforts in that role, the Australian government in 2012 bestowed Mimura with the symbolic title of Honorary Companion for what was identified as his exemplary service for building strong relationships between the two countries.
 
Nippon Steel Corp. was formed by a merger between Yawata Steel and Fuji Steel in 1970. Another merger eventually led to an additional slight change in the company’s name. Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation, was formed in 2012 with the merger of Nippon Steel and Sumitomo Metal.
 
The company is now headquartered in Tokyo. Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation, along with its subsidiaries, produces steel materials, new materials and chemicals and provides services related to engineering and construction, urban development and computer systems engineering and consulting.
