
The Apple App Store is a digital distribution platform where individuals can buy and download digital software and applications. Apps—an abbreviation of the word "applications"—are software tools that provide additional functionality to an operating system. Apps purchased from the Apple App Store are stored in the iCloud—a cloud storage and cloud computing service from Apple—for easy access from any signed-in device.
 
While Apple maintains that it holds a trademark on the term “app store," the term is used to reference any platform where apps are sold. Examples of other app stores are Google's Google Play, the Amazon Appstore, Blackberry World, and Microsoft's Windows Store.
 
Apple’s App Store is a big business for the company. In 2019, Apple's App Store had gross sales of around $50 billion. Developers take approximately 70% of the purchase price of an app on the Apple App Store. Even still, this means that the App Store generated about $15 billion in revenue for Apple in 2019.
 
Apps can be created by any developer but must be approved by Apple in order to be sold in the App Store.
 
The Apple App Store opened on July 10, 2008, the day before the launch of the iPhone 3G. Apple’s first app store was originally intended for iOS, but it was later expanded to provide apps for Macs with the App Store macOS in early 2011. 
 
One of the many significant changes to Apple's App Store came in 2014. Attention from European regulators caused the company to change apps listed with the language of "free." Now, these apps include the word "get" in order to convey that some of these apps included in-app purchases. In 2017, this labeling practice became standard.
 
Developers must pay a $99 annual fee to access the Apple Developer Program. (This fee is waived for nonprofits and governments.) App publishers must submit their app to a testing process, adhere to Apple's rules and guidelines, and meet a number of prerequisites. Some prerequisites include:
 
Developers should also consider basic information such as a name, pricing and availability, metadata, and ratings.
