
A bottom-collar scam is a fraudulent claim by swindlers or con artists who prey on job seekers and vulnerable people. Bottom-dollar scams involve false promises about making substantial deals of money through avenues such as working from home, mortgage modification, debt reduction, and so on.
 
Bottom-dollar scams are also known as “last-dollar” scams by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the consumer protection watchdog in the U.S. because they claim that their outlandish promises are solid schemes on which an individual can bet his or her last dollar. Such scams are particularly egregious because they target people who may be going through a financially difficult time due to job loss or illness, and being victimized by such scams in many cases worsens a desperate situation.
 
In 2010, in the wake of the Great Recession and the subprime mortgage crisis, the FTC launched Operation Bottom Dollar to crack down on scam artists targeting desperate job seekers. Although the unemployment rate has since dropped significantly, the FTC continues to go after bottom-dollar scammers.
 
At the root of many bottom-dollar scams are classic pyramid schemes. For example, in June 2018, the FTC convinced a federal judge to halt the operations of a company called MOBE (My Online Business Education) that promised to teach people how to get rich by creating their own Internet businesses. After an initial fee of $45, the “students” were bombarded with up-sale pitches totaling thousands of dollars. In the end, the big “secret” to online business success was revealed to be acquiring signups from other new students to the program.
 
The FTC identifies two big red flags in identifying a bottom-dollar scam: a requirement to pay money upfront, and the promise of a guaranteed job. It notes that bottom-dollar scams can take various forms, some of which include:
 
To avoid getting taken in by a bottom-dollar scam, the FTC advises that a prospective job seeker ask plenty of questions and check with the Better Business Bureau for complaints about the entity offering the job.
