
The term deliverables is a project management term that's traditionally used to describe the quantifiable goods or services that must be provided upon the completion of a project. Deliverables can be tangible or intangible in nature. For example, in a project focusing on upgrading a firm's technology, a deliverable may refer to the acquisition of a dozen new computers.
 
On the other hand, for a software project, a deliverable might allude to the implementation of a computer program aimed at improving a company's accounts receivable computational efficiency.
 
In addition to computer equipment and software programs, a deliverable may refer to in-person or online training programs, as well as design samples for products in the process of being developed. In many cases, deliverables are accompanied by instruction manuals.
 
Deliverables are usually contractually obligated requirements, detailed in agreements drawn up between two related parties within a company, or between a client and an outside consultant or developer. The documentation precisely articulates the description of a deliverable, as well as the delivery timeline and payment terms.
 
[Important: Sometimes, distributors that are purchasing independent films for theatrical release will not include a list of deliverables with the first draft of a term sheet; it's thus important for filmmakers to proactively ask for the expected deliverables so that they can be assembled in a timely manner.]
 
Many large projects include milestones, which are interim goals and targets that must be achieved by stipulated points in time. A milestone may refer to a portion of the deliverable due, or it may merely refer to a detailed progress report, describing the current status of a project.
 
In film production, deliverables refer to the range of audio, visual, and paperwork files that producers must furnish to distributors. Audio and visual materials generally include stereo and Dolby 5.1 sound mixes, music and sound effects on separate files, as well as the full movie in a specified format.
 
Paperwork deliverables include signed and executed licensing agreements for all music, errors, and omissions reports, performance releases for all on-screen talent, a list of the credit block that will appear in all artwork and advertising, as well as location, artwork, and logo legal releases. Films deliverables also pertain to elements that are ancillary to the movies themselves. These items include the trailer, TV spots, publicity stills photographed on set, and other legal work.
