
Devolvement refers to a situation when the under-subscription of a security or debt issue forces an underwriting investment bank to purchase unsold shares during the offering. In the underwriting process, an investment bank will help to raise capital for the issuing companies. As part of the underwriting process, the bank may include making a commitment to the company to sell all shares of the issue. However, if investors do not purchase those securities, the responsibility for the unsold shares may devolve to the und
 
Devolvement may happen in the issue or selling of company debt and also through selling an initial public offer
 
Devolvement poses a substantial risk to an underwriting investment bank. When it is required to purchase unsubscribed shares of an issue, the price will often be at a higher-than-market-value price. Typically, the investment bank will not hold onto the floundering issue for long but will sell the shares on the secondary market. Many times, the bank will experience a financial loss.
 
Devolvement may be seen as an indication that the market has negative sentiments toward the issue. This negative sentiment may have a significant impact on subsequent demand for the company's existing shares or debt offerings. Underwriting banks may suffer the results of negative views as they try to move any shares t
 
Enhanced capital and media attention associated with a company with an undersubscribed offering has risks for companies and underwriting banks. Typically, the goal of a public offering is to sell at the exact price at which all the issued shares can be sold to investors, and there is neither a shortage nor a surplus of se
 
Most of the time in the U.S., the company that hopes to go public and the investment bank underwriting the IPO have done the necessary homework to ensure the initial shares are all purchased and devolvement isn't
 
Investment underwriters do not necessarily guarantee that a total issue will sell. It will depend on the underwriting agreement the bank and the issuing company agrees upon. Different types of contracts will involve varying levels of devolve
