
The European Credit Research Institute (ECRI) is a policy institute focused on research and advocacy in retail finance and financial technology in Europe.
 
The European Credit Research Institute (ECRI) is an independent non-profit policy research institute, established by a consortium of European financial institutions in 1999 to provide analysis of the European retail financial services landscape.
 
Since its founding, ECRI developed a reputation for being a key objective observer of the industry and a primary resource for analysis, forecasting, and insight into the structure and evolution of European retail financial services markets. For instance, ECRI issued warnings well ahead of the 2008 financial collapse. 
 
To this end, ECRI maintains databases to provide reliable and timely data to legislators, regulators, academics and industry members regarding current regulations, legislation, technology, and finance industry performance.
 
ECRI publishes a host of newsletters, white papers, reports, policy briefs and commentaries for both financial industry constituents and the general public regarding all aspects of retail financial services in Europe, including regulation, fintech, responsible lending practices, credit reporting, and consumer credit and protection.
 
ECRI also hosts conferences, seminars, and workshops which provide forums for industry members, academics, consumer advocates and government representatives to discuss and debate aspects of current and emerging European financial policy.
 
Operations and staffing of ECRI is managed by the Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS), and funding for operations is supplied by a combination of fees for research and membership fees from member organizations. As of July 2018, ECRI members include ACI Worldwide, American Express, BNP Paribas, Cofidis, ING, the Luxembourg Bankers Association, Providential Finance, Schufa, Sparda Banken and VISA.
 
CEPS was established in 1983 in Brussels as an impartial think tank devoted to policy research and academic excellence in exploring economic and political challenges facing Europe. CEPS maintains several programs and initiatives and engages a number of international collaborations, including the European Network for Economic and Fiscal Policy Research, the European Network of Economic Policy Research Institutes, and the Council of Councils.
 
CEPS co-produces the European policy journal Intereconomics, and hosts the annual CEPS Ideas Lab, which brings together think tanks across Europe each year to address key European policy issues.
 
CEPS also operates the European Capital Markets Institute (ECMI). Similar to ECRI in many ways, this sister organization conducts policy research on issues regarding European capital markets, and also provides publications and forums for stakeholders in this arena.
 
Additionally, CEPS provides advanced academic activities in European policy for graduate and post-graduate students and stakeholders, as well as ongoing policy research regarding cybersecurity and the European Commission’s Digital Single Market strategy. 
