
Executive compensation is a significant thing to consider when evaluating an investment opportunity. Executives who are improperly compensated may not have the incentive to perform in the best interest of shareholders, which can be costly for those shareholders.
 
While new laws and regulations have made executive compensation much clearer in company filings, many investors remain clueless as to how to find and read these critical reports. This article will take a look at the different types of executive compensation and how investors can find and evaluate compensation information.
 
There are many different forms of executive compensation, offering a variety of tax benefits and performance incentives. Below are the most common forms:
 
All executive compensation information can be found in public filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SEC mandates all public companies to disclose how much they are paying their executives, how this amount is derived, and who is involved in determining pay.﻿﻿ The information itself is disclosed in several locations, including:
 
Evaluating executive compensation can be a difficult task for the individual investor. Luckily, there are many tools available to make the process easier. These tools automatically parse SEC filings to pull the numbers and make comparisons designed to give meaning to raw information.
 
One of the most popular ways to evaluate executive compensation is by comparing pay and performance. Unfortunately, many executives are given raises and bonuses even when their companies are faltering. Comparing pay to stock performance can help you determine whether executives are overpaid.
 
The specific metric used most often is comparing the change year over year in executive pay increases to the change year in stock price. If the change in the stock price outpaces the change in pay, the executive is not overpaid. Here is an example of a comparison for Bill Gates, who was Microsoft's CEO between 1975 and 2000 and the company's chief software architect and chairman between 2000 and 2006:
 
Source: ExecutiveDisclosure.com
 
Between 1998 and 2006, Bill Gates' compensation is tied pretty closely to the company's overall performance. When the company makes more money, Gates receives more compensation and vice versa. This is healthy because it provides executives with the incentive to perform well and increase their wealth. Trends are showing executives receiving a higher rate than performance can mean overcompensation for underperformance, which can hurt investors both in dollars paid out and incentive to perform.
 
Another popular way to evaluate executive compensation is to compare one executive to his or her industry peers. While market leaders typically have CEOs who are paid slightly more than their industries, the majority of executives should be paid on par with their peers. Here is the same example as above, except this time, it's a peer comparison instead of pay vs. performance:
 
Source: ExecutiveDisclosure.com
 
Here we can see that Bill Gates made more than the average executive in his industry over the charted period. Sometimes, if the executive is the founder of the company or a high-class CEO, he or she may deserve higher compensation. Because Bill Gates is both an industry mogul and the company's founder, this may explain his comparatively higher compensation. Significant deviations between these two in standard non-founder CEOs can indicate that they are overpaid.
 
There have been many new laws passed to help satisfy investor concerns over executive compensation. Changes in SEC reporting requirements have forced companies to include an "Executive Compensation Discussion and Analysis" section to accompany future pay documentation in all SEC forms. This section requires a "readable" explanation of how the compensation was determined and what it encompasses.﻿﻿﻿﻿
 
Other laws have been more direct in curbing practices the companies themselves use. One prime example of this was the removal of the deferred compensation tax shelter that helped many executives avoid millions in taxes.﻿﻿ Moreover, improvements in other tax loopholes have made it much harder for boards to justify large payouts and hide these payouts from investors.
 
Executive compensation is a very important issue for investors to consider when making decisions. An improperly compensated executive can cost shareholders money and can produce an executive who lacks the incentive to increase profits and boost the share price. Meanwhile, the government is working to curb the problem with new laws that close loopholes and make the process more transparent. Combined with new analysis tools, investors are now much more informed.
 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Executive Compensation." Accessed April 27, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Form 8-K." Accessed April 27, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Form 10-K." Accessed April 27, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Form 10-Q." Accessed April 27, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Form S-1," Pages 4-5. Accessed April 27, 2020. Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. "Executive Compensation Disclosure Handbook: A Practical Guide to the SEC’s Executive Compensation Disclosure Rules," Page 2. Accessed April 27, 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Final Rule: Executive Compensation and Related Person Disclosure," Pages 29-30. Accessed April 27, 2020. Institutional Investor. "Blame it on Enron." Accessed April 27, 2020.