
While many companies and products have established brand equity, a few of the most recognized are Tylenol, Kirkland Signature by Costco (COST), Coca-Cola (KO), Starbucks (SBUX), and Porsche. All of these companies enforce quality control to ensure the best possible service or product is delivered to the client or consumer.
 
Manufactured since 1955 by McNeil (now a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson), Tylenol ranks above average in the pain relief category, according to the Mayo Clinic. EquiTrend studies show that consumers trust Tylenol over generic brands. Tylenol has been able to grow its market with the creations of Tylenol Extra Strength, Tylenol Cold & Flu, and Tylenol Sinus Congestion & Pain.
 
Since 2009, the Kirkland Signature brand by Costco has maintained positive growth. Signature encompasses hundreds of items, including clothing, coffee, laundry detergent and food and beverages (one study shows that Costco sells more wine than any other brand in the country, despite state laws that restrict it from selling alcohol in certain areas).
 
Costco even provides members with exclusive access to cheaper gasoline at its private gas stations. Adding to Kirkland's popularity is the fact that its products cost less than other name brands. Costco's Kirklands is similar to other private label brands.
 
According to a Starbucks consumer case study, customers choose their brand of coffee over others both because of its quality and because of the company. Rated the sixth-most-desired company in the world by Fortune magazine. Starbucks is held in high regard for its pledge to social responsibility.
 
With more than 28,000 stores around the globe, Starbucks remains the largest roaster and retailer of Arabica coffee beans and specialty coffees. Among Fortune 500 rankings for 2020, Starbucks ranks no. 121.
 
With a brand value in the ballpark of $80 billion, Coca-Cola has often rated the best soda brand in the world. This has grown from $68 billion in 2009. However, the brand itself represents more than just the products—it's symbolic of positive experiences, a proud history, even the U.S. itself. 
 
Also recognized for its unique marketing campaigns, the Coca-Cola corporation has made a global impact on its consumer engagement. According to Fortune, Coca-Cola is the 12th most admired company in the world. Among beverage companies, they rank no. 1. For the Fortune 500 rankings, Coca-Cola comes in at no. 100.
 
Porsche, a brand with strong equity in the automobile sector, retains its image and reliability through the use of high-quality, unique materials. Viewed as a luxury brand, Porsche provides owners of its vehicles not only with a product but an experience. In comparison to other vehicle brands in its class, Porsche ranks no. 1 in terms of automobile brand rankings, above brands such as Mercedes and BMW, according to Consumer Reports.
