
The first-year allowance is a UK tax allowance permitting British corporations to deduct between 6% and 100% of the cost of qualifying capital expenditures made during the year the equipment was first purchased. This serves as an incentive for British companies to invest in emerging and eco-friendly products.
 
The first-year allowance is an important tax incentive encouraging UK businesses to make investments in capital equipment. Its origins date back to the post-World War II era when the British government was looking for ways to rebuild the economy. The British government permits first-year allowances for various capital investments including computer and internet technology, as well as energy-saving technologies. The allowable amount of this tax credit ranges from 6 percent to 100 percent.
 
Examples of capital expenditures eligible for the first-year allowance include some cars that meet low CO2 emission standards; energy-saving equipment; water conservation equipment, various biofuel and hydrogen refueling equipment as well as zero-emission delivery vehicles. The first-year allowance only applies in cases where the business that purchased the capital goods uses them for their own business and not when leased for use by others.
 
If a business does not take the first-year allowance in the eligible tax year, they can still claim a partial reduction on the cost in the following year using alternative write down allowances. Full information on what is eligible for the first-year allowance and how to file can be found on the Gov.UK website.
 
Following World War II, British lawmakers looking to revitalize the economy passed the Income Tax Act of 1945, which launched a system of capital allowances to encourage business investment.
 
Beginning in 1946 the former wear-and-tear allowances for machinery were replaced with a new system of first-year allowances, which given their timeliness, worked better in bringing about the desired quick economic impact. In tandem with these new allowances, increases to the write-down provisions of the tax code were made to further aid business development. A key component of this effort to stimulate the post-war economy was a first-year allowance for replacing the vacant old mills and buildings from the Industrial Era with modern buildings better suited for the post-war manufacturing and information services economy.
 
Nowadays, the first-year allowance is an important incentive for businesses to invest in green, or clean, technologies. To further encourage this, the British government in late 2017 extended the first-year allowances on zero-emission vehicles and refueling equipment to a full three years, instead of just the first year.
