
In the initial public offering (IPO) world, "freed up" refers to the time after the lock-up period when investment bank underwriters are no longer obligated to sell securities at the agreed-upon price. When an investment bank is freed up, it is allowed to trade any remaining securities at the prevalent market price.
 
"Freed up" can be a clue to the status of an initial public offering (IPO) or a direct public offering (DPO). If a firm decides to start offering public shares of its stock, it typically must hire one or more investment banks (IB) that can take care of the IPO. Employing more than one bank can help spread the risk of the IPO between banks, but one bank will usually be the lead during this process.
 
These banks will place their bids for handling the IPO. Equity underwriters will work closely with the issuing company to determine the initial offering share price. The underwriter also guarantees a specific number of shares will be sold at that initial price and will purchase any surplus. Each of the underwriting banks will assume a particular number of shares to sell on the market.
 
Once an investment bank contracts to market these shares they cannot give them back to the company. For this reason, the most crucial time in the IPO is when the market share price is determined.
 
During the initial public offering (IPO), the bank agrees to market their allotted shares of the security at the fixed price. Sometimes, the demand for the shares is significant and investors are willing to pay higher prices. However, until the syndicate is freed up from the fixed price restrictions, it cannot adjust the sale price of the stock, despite the increased demand. 
 
The term "freed up" also applies to company insiders who hold shares of a business. These holders of company shares may have contractual restrictions on selling their shares on the open market until after the lock-up period.
 
"Freed up" may also refer to the amount of capital that becomes available to an investor when closing a position. The freed-up funds can then be used to invest in other assets.
 
When a company starts the IPO process, a specific set of events must occur.
 
After this period of stabilization for the shares passes, insiders and investment banks may sell their shares on the open market. Sometimes insiders cannot sell shares even when the lock-up period ends. They may have nonpublic information about the company, and a sale would constitute insider trading. Such a scenario might occur, for example, if the end of the lock-up coincided with earnings season.
