
The term game-changer refers to an individual or company that significantly alters the way things are done as a whole. Individual game-changers find a way to stand out by way of their personality. Game-changing companies are able to switch things up and form new business plans and strategies that place them above their competition. By mere virtue of their actions, game-changers can make changes that transform the landscape as a whole.
 
Game-changing is the ability to make significant changes. These changes may often be radical, but almost always lead to a shift in the way others think and do things. A game-changer, therefore, is someone or something that can spark a great deal of change. The game-changer can be an individual person or a company, and they often use innovative techniques to become game-changers.
 
A game-changing individual often uses their personality traits and attitude to change the way people think and how others do things. These people are often called influencers because they can shift the dynamic and change the way people think an act. For instance, a social media influencer with one million followers may be considered a game-changer because of their fashion sense. As such, they are able to revolutionize how others dress or do their makeup.
 
Game-changing companies are those that look for new business plans, efficiences, production methods, and marketing strategies. These innovations open up new avenues of economic and financial growth, often transforming the entire image of an industry. Companies are often headed up by game-changing individuals—visionary leaders with game-changing ideas continue to create innovative new paths to change the status quo.
 Becoming a game-changer requires a long-term commitment as well as innovative thinking. 
Reaching game-changing levels requires a long-term commitment—one that takes time, determination, and the ability to ride out any uncertainties that may arise. But entrepreneurs can find new tactics, ways of thinking, and other characteristics that make up a game-changer or industry disruptor by learning from other visionary leadership and the anatomy of game-changing companies.
 
Billionaire and Amazon chief executive officer (CEO) Jeff Bezos is widely recognized as a game-changer. It's not surprising when you consider what he's done since he founded the company in 1994. Amazon started as a little book e-commerce website during the internet boom of the late-1990s, quickly disrupting the retail industry as a whole. Today, Bezos’s leadership helps drive the company to new heights, as it continues to invest in new game-changing technologies such as drone deliveries.
 
Elon Musk is another entrepreneurial individual who is considered to be a game-changer. Musk who became Tesla's CEO in 2008, had high ambitions of being a game-changer in the auto industry. Tesla is now the leading name in electric cars, bringing them into the modern world by using high-powered lithium-ion batteries to power vehicles rather than gasoline. While Musk's vision for Tesla production is often criticized, the company's emergence in the electric car market is causing others to scramble and try to catch up to its impressive lead.
