As of Aug. 4, 2020, 5,136,072 forgivable paycheck protection program (PPP) loans had been approved by the Small Business Administration (SBA). And on Oct. 8, 2020, the SBA revealed a simpler loan forgiveness application for loans of $50,000 or less﻿﻿. 
Economic injury disaster loan (EIDL) forgivable advances were halted July 15, 2020, but not before 5,781,390 had also been approved. If your small business was among those fortunate enough to receive an EIDL loan advance or hope to claim a PPP loan before the August 8, 2020 deadline, your next major hurdle will be to ensure the amount you receive is actually forgiven.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Two government loan programs offer forgiveness during the COVID-19 crisis:
 
The average forgivable EIDL advance was just $3,459 and the average forgivable PPP loan so far has been $101,782.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Although the EIDL advance part of the EIDL program has expired, you have until Dec. 16, 2020, in most states, to apply for a non-forgiveable EIDL loan. Barring new financing or an extension of the EIDL advance or PPP loan program, those avenues are or will be closed as of Aug. 8.
 
If you have already received a PPP loan or one is still being considered, you will want to pay careful attention to the forgiveness process.
 
The EIDL Loan program includes a forgiveable advance and a loan portion that must be repaid. Here is how the process works.
 
Of the two, EIDL loan advance forgiveness is the easiest to understand and comply with. Your EIDL advance is considered part of the EIDL loan that you apply for along with the advance. If you receive the advance and are subsequently denied or decline the EIDL, you still don't have to pay the advance back.
 As of July 15, 2020, SBA EIDL advance funds were no longer available. EIDL loan applications may be made until Dec. 16, 2020 in most states.﻿﻿ 
If you accept an EIDL, the loan itself will not be forgiven. The only part that is forgiven is the loan advance of up to $10,000. You also need to know that the forgivable loan advance is not a flat $10,000 but $1,000 per employee with a maximum of $10,000 (10 or more employees).﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Your EIDL advance will not have to be repaid provided that you use 100% of the money for:
 
You may not use your EIDL advance (or loan) for:
 
Consequences of EIDL non-permitted use: If you use all or part of your advance (or loan) for non-permitted uses, it will not be forgiven and may be subject to immediate payback.
 
Since the EIDL loan and loan advance are considered disaster funds, if the SBA determines you misused the funds, the penalty could be immediate repayment of one-and-a-half times the original loan amount, plus possible criminal charges.﻿﻿
 Your EIDL loan advance will be deducted from the forgivable part of any subsequent PPP loan you receive.﻿﻿ 
To date there has been no specific guidance on tax treatment of the advance. Tracie Britton of bookkeeping, operations, and client management firm, Britton Management says she has been working on the assumption that "the EIDL advance will be treated like a non-taxable grant" Others, including Bench Accounting, suggest the advance will need to be included in taxable income.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Your EIDL, minus the forgiven portion, is a loan, payable over up to 30 years (depending on your ability to repay). That loan, provided you adhere to the terms, is at 3.75% interest and includes an automatic one-year deferral on repayment although interest will continue to accrue.﻿﻿
 
As discussed, the only part of an EIDL loan that can be forgiven is the advance. There is no formal application process for EIDL advance forgiveness. Once you receive the funds, you are free to use them immediately. The only requirement is that you must spend the advance only for expenses listed above. Although there is no application or accounting requirement, you should keep a detailed record of how you spend advance funds in the event the SBA has questions at a later date.﻿﻿
 
Since the entire PPP loan is subject to forgiveness, the rules are different for this program and considerably more involved than those for the EIDL advance. Unlike EIDL loans and advances, PPP loans are made through an SBA-approved lender creating another layer of bureaucracy.
 
When you accept a PPP loan, you do so with the understanding that any part of the loan that is not forgiven will have to be paid back. As with EIDL, with PPP you apply for a loan first. With EIDL, the grant is forgiven automatically. With PPP you must seek forgiveness after you have spent the money.
 
Passage of the PPP Flexibility Act of 2020 on June 5, 2020, made important changes to PPP loan forgiveness that extend the amount of time you have to spend the money, lower the percent that must be spent on payroll, and more.
 
Your PPP loan may be forgiven if you use the money for:
 
+ This is a permitted but not forgivable use (see below).
 
You may not use your PPP loan for:
 
Consequences of PPP non-permitted use: If you use all or part of PPP loan for non-permitted uses, it will not be forgiven and may be subject to immediate payback.﻿﻿
 You will not lose PPP loan forgiveness if you: Instead, you can exclude those employees from the loan-forgiveness reduction calculation required under the Act, according to a new Treasury Dept. FAQ and the PPP Flexibility Act.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿  
Along with using PPP loan funds for permitted uses, you must also adhere to some additional requirements under the PPP Flexibility Act, which became law June 5, 2020 and follow-on guidance released August 4, 2020 by the SBA and Department of the Treasury.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 You have the option to stick with the original 8-week covered period if you received your loan before enactment of the PPP Flexibility Act of 2020. This might apply if you can't reasonably retain or rehire your entire workforce for the new 24-week covered period. 
The IRS has ruled that any forgiven part of a PPP loan is exempt from being taxed as a "discharged debt." This means you do not have to declare the forgiven part of your loan as income when you file taxes for 2020 in 2021.﻿﻿
 
The PPP Flexibility Act of 2020 lets businesses that took PPP loans also delay paying their payroll taxes. This was not allowed under the original CARES Act that established the PPP loan.﻿﻿
 
The CARES Act requires that you apply to your lender for loan forgiveness at the end of the 8- or 24-week period following disbursement of your loan (depending on your election). To apply you must submit the following:
 Your lender must make a decision on your application for forgiveness within 60 days.﻿﻿ 
Because of the complexity of PPP loan forgiveness and the unanswered questions (see below) about how the process works, Britton advises that employers keep meticulous records of all PPP-related spending. "Track and document everything," she says. "If you think it might be a pertinent expense, record it."﻿﻿
 
On June 17, 2020, the SBA and Treasury Department announced a revised, scaled-down (5 pages vs. 11) Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loan forgiveness application that incorporates changes made by the PPP Flexibility Act of 2020. At the same time SBA published a new 3-page EZ version of the application if you:
 
According to the SBA the EZ application requires fewer calculations and less documentation. Both applications remind you of the option to use the original 8-week covered period (if your loan was made before June 5, 2020) or the extended 24-week covered period, if that is your preference.
 
PPP Loan Forgiveness Application Form 3508EZ (PDF)
 
PPP Full Loan Forgiveness Application Revised June 16, 2020 (PDF)
 
Any part of your PPP loan that is not forgiven must be paid back, either immediately, in the case of non-permitted use, or in the form of a five-year loan at 1% interest. Loan payments on permitted use, including principal, interest, and fees are deferred until the SBA remits your forgiveness amount to you or, If you do not apply for forgiveness, for 10 months from the end of your loan-forgiveness covered period.
 
An example of a permitted but not forgivable use would be utility costs that push your non-payroll expenses over 25% of the amount forgiven. Another example would be interest on non-mortgage debt in place on Feb. 15, 2020.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
As much as is known about the Paycheck Protection Program, there is just as much that is not known. As guidance becomes available and to the extent it answers any of these questions, information will be added to this article.
 Globenewswire.com. "SBA and Treasury Announce Simpler PPP Forgiveness for Loans of $50,000 or Less." Accessed Oct. 8, 2020. SBA. "SBA Disaster Assistance Update: EIDL Advance." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. SBA. "Paycheck Protection Program." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. SBA. "Coronavirus (COVID-19)." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. U.S. Congress. "H.R. 748." Accessed May 5, 2020. Rep. Connor Lamb. "COVID-19 FAQs." Accessed May 5, 2020. NAV. "COVID-19 Disaster Loans vs PPP Loans." Accessed May 5, 2020. LawHelp. "Disaster Assistance: Small Business Association Loans." Accessed May 5, 2020. SBA. "Business Loan Program Temporary Changes." Accessed May 5, 2020. Bench. "2020 Taxes: How the PPP, EIDL, and PUA Will Affect Your Taxes." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. Britton, 2020. U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "Guide to SBAs EIDL Loans." Accessed May 5, 2020. JDSupra. "Clarifying the CARES Act." Accessed May 5, 2020. U.S. Congress. "H.R. 7010." Accessed Jun 8, 2020. Treasury Dept. "Paycheck Protection Program Loans." Accessed May 5, 2020. SBA. "Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on PPP Loan Forgiveness." Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. IRS. "Notice 2020-32." Accessed May 5, 2020. Treasury Dept. "Paycheck Protection Program - Fact Sheet." Accessed May 5, 2020. SBA. "SBA and Treasury Announce New EZ and Revised Full Forgiveness Applications for the Paycheck Protection Program." Accessed Jun 17, 2020. FMA. "Managing Your PPP Loan and Forgiveness." Accessed May 5, 2020.