
The marriage of Meghan Markle and Prince Harry was anything but ordinary. Even among royal marriages it’s unique because Meghan is American. And to make matters slightly more complicated, in January 2020, Prince Harry and Markle announced that they would be stepping back as senior members of the Royal family.
 
Their reason for doing so is to become financially independent, which means that they will no longer be recipients of any funding from the Sovereign Grant, which is the government's payment to the monarch through taxpayer money for official duties. In addition, Prince Harry and Markle have decided to make their permanent residence in Canada, though they will be splitting time between both Canada and the U.K.
 
Given the complexity of being members of the Royal family, becoming financially independent is no easy task, considering the amount of factors involved, such as security measures, tax implications, royal protocol, and the general need for privacy towards royal finances. Regardless of how the untangling from the Royal family proceeds, as a U.S. citizen, Markle will have to abide by the country's tax laws.
 
American citizens like Markle, who was born in Los Angeles, must report their worldwide income to the IRS even while living abroad. (For more, see: How to Pay Taxes If You're Overseas.) She will have to file U.S. tax returns and Foreign Bank Accounting Report (FBAR) forms, assuming she becomes the signatory on or holder of accounts worth $10,000 or more. The penalties for not filing FBARs can be harsh and include both fines and possible jail time.
 
Although Markle has left her acting role as an attorney on the television show Suits, she will continue to earn residuals from reruns and DVD sales. But that income is insignificant compared to what she could receive as a member of the Royal family. And that’s what will make the couple’s tax situation, and the family’s desire for financial privacy, so tricky to navigate.
 
Markle could have to report to the IRS, as income, the value of seemingly inconsequential things, such as being lent expensive jewelry, being given a vacation, or living in royal housing with her husband. Merely failing to report something she’s required to report, even if it’s not taxable, could result in major tax penalties.
 
Even though Prince Harry will no longer be receiving his annual allowance after stepping back from being a senior royal, he will still have ties to royal finances. Much of his wealth comes through funding from his father, Prince Charles, through the Duchy of Cornwall. And on their website, Prince Harry and Markle said that they will still make use of state-funded security and continue to live in a royal residence owned by the Queen.
 
The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) will also affect the married couple. As long as Markle remains a U.S. citizen, she will have to file form 8938, Statement of Foreign Financial Assets, with the IRS each year. The reason: She will have an interest in foreign financial assets worth more than the threshold, which is either $200,000 (if she elects the married filing separately status) or $400,000 (if the couple chooses to file jointly). Markle’s share of the Royal family’s assets won’t come in below either threshold.
 
Still, for other reasons, it will matter which filing status the couple chooses. Writing for the European Financial Review, San Francisco-based tax lawyer Robert Wood explains that while almost all married couples file joint tax returns with the IRS, Markle and her prince should choose the married filing separately status, which limits each spouse’s liability for what is and isn’t reported on the return.
 
While choosing this filing status makes couples ineligible for certain tax credits and limits certain deductions, such concerns are unlikely to be meaningful for such a wealthy couple. More importantly, filing separately would mean Markle would not have to report Prince Harry’s assets or income. The Royal family would probably prefer that its finances not become the knowledge of the Internal Revenue Service. The temptation for someone to leak that private information would be great.
 
The only way for Markle and the British oyal family to extricate themselves from the tax nightmare the IRS has created for U.S. citizens living abroad is for Markle to renounce her U.S. citizenship, something only a few thousand Americans do each year. But even if Markle renounces her U.S. citizenship, she will still have to report any U.S. sourced income from her acting residuals to the IRS. And should Markle renounce her U.S. citizenship, her high net worth could require her to pay an expatriation tax.
 
What kind of money is the Duchess of Sussex bringing into the marriage? Celebrity Net Worth reports that Markle’s net worth is around $5 million. She earned about $450,000 annually as an actress in Suits, which she joined in 2011 and the show ran till 2019. She has also earned income from her women’s fashion line at Montreal-based clothing store Reitman’s, plus six-figure sums from her film appearances.
 
The IRS requires expatriating Americans to pay an exit tax if their net worth is $2 million or more on the date of expatriation, which Markle’s certainly would be. And she would have to file form 8854 listing her net worth and property owned on the date of expatriation and certifying that she has complied with all of her U.S. tax obligations for the past five years. The form includes a detailed balance sheet and income statement, too.
 
But even if she wants to or her in-laws pressure her into it, Markle won’t be able to renounce her U.S. citizenship right away. She will eventually become a British citizen, but she can’t even apply for citizenship until she’s been married and living in the U.K. with Prince Harry for three years. So the couple will have no choice but to deal with the IRS for the next several years.
 
If the couple resided in the United States, Prince Harry would not have to file British taxes: Britain doesn’t have a worldwide tax system. But that wouldn’t solve the problem of the IRS learning certain details of the Royal family’s finances.
 
Some details are already public. The Duchy of Cornwall publishes annual financial statements of its income, expenditures, and staff. And we know that Prince Harry brings an estimated net worth of $40 million into the marriage, according to the U.K.’s Daily Mail. About one-third of his fortune comes from the $13.3 million he inherited from his late mother, Princess Diana.
 
The tax implications of the royal couple’s marriage highlight the complexities of the U.S. tax system. It’s convoluted enough if you’re a U.S. resident, and it only gets worse if you’re a U.S. citizen residing abroad. As the couple’s totally unromantic tax story unfolds over the next few years, it will be interesting to see if the extra attention their situation brings to the difficulties of the U.S. tax code will spark any changes.
