
The electronic commerce (e-commerce) movement is bigger than ever and only shows signs of becoming bigger. Under the purview of e-commerce companies, both eBay (EBAY) and Amazon (AMZN) stand out as longstanding, major players in the marketplace.
 
Both eBay and Amazon operate as online shopping sites, providing visitors the ability to browse through available products listed for sale or auction through each company's online storefront. While eBay and Amazon have both evolved over time to meet the needs of today's consumers, there are distinct differences between the two companies. Amazon and eBay differ in terms of business models and pricing, services for sellers and ancillary services for buyers.
 
The greatest difference between eBay and Amazon is the business model under which each company operates. Specifically, eBay is an auction house and marketplace that simply facilitates the sale of goods between third-party buyers and sellers. Buyers visit the site to search for products they want to buy from a vast array of individual sellers and then bid on items through individual auctions.﻿﻿
 
Conversely, Amazon is a direct provider of goods, and customers visiting its site view products that Amazon maintains as inventory in its large network of warehouses.﻿﻿ For some products, Amazon allows third-party sellers to offer purchase options to buyers, but the company keeps the majority of its products in-house.﻿﻿
 
Within an auction model, eBay employs a wholesale pricing strategy. In most cases, interested buyers must bid on items for sale on eBay Sellers list auction items for a three-, five-, seven- or 10-day period, and the buyer willing to pay the highest amount wins the product at the end of that time frame.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ Some items listed on eBay feature a "buy it now" option, which allows a buyer to purchase the product immediately, albeit likely for a premium.﻿﻿
 
Amazon operates as a retail outlet, providing customers with fixed prices on all products. While various sellers may list the same product, there is no need for a customer to place bids or win an auction before purchasing.
 
Amazon and eBay also differ greatly in terms of how each company works to facilitate sales. Because eBay needs sellers to list products on its site to generate revenue, the company is far more seller-oriented than Amazon. Notably, eBay actively invites sellers to participate in its auction marketplace, and the company provides platforms for sellers to offer products to buyers within an eBay store or through the auction site's classified section.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Amazon is more buyer-oriented, actively inviting buyers to visit the site to browse through and subsequently purchase its own inventory. While some third-party sellers use Amazon to distribute products, the company is more focused on attracting buyers to the site.﻿﻿
 
It doesn't matter if you're a small seller or big potatoes with an already established product line that you want to put onto the Amazon marketplace as a third-party seller. Amazon offers third-party sellers two different plans based on their prospective selling habits and other key features.﻿﻿
 
You'll have to decide which one fits your needs. The professional plan is geared toward those who plan on doing a lot of selling, while the individual account is a no-frills, cheaper alternative.﻿﻿ Below are some of the features of both plans.
 
If you're planning on selling more than 40 items each month, this is the option for you. But it does come with a subscription fee of $39.99 each month. That means you'll be paying almost $480 a year to put and sell your products on Amazon. You also get access to Amazon Sponsored Products ads, which put your products into ads on different product pages for customers to view. This option doesn't have any selling fees, but referral fees do apply.﻿﻿
 
This plan is tailored for anyone who plans to sell less than 40 items each month. The benefit of this account is the lack of a monthly subscription fee. But you do have to pay the selling fee to Amazon—$0.99 for every item you sell on the site. There are also referral fees that apply to each sale, just like the professional account. The one downside is that you have no exposure to your products through Amazon's Sponsored Product Ads.﻿﻿
 
Here's how Amazon calculates end revenue for an item sold by a third-party seller on the platform:﻿﻿
 
Notably, eBay charges its sellers two different fees: an insertion fee and a final value fee. Here's a breakdown of each:﻿﻿
 
Additional fees may apply. Here's a look at two of them:﻿﻿
 
Another vast difference between eBay and Amazon is the ancillary services available to buyers. In recent years, Amazon has rapidly expanded its additional services, most notably through its global rollout of Amazon Prime. The membership program requires users to pay an annual fee but grants them exclusive access to expedited two-day shipping at no additional cost, digital media such as movies, music, and Kindle e-books, and unlimited photo storage through the cloud.﻿﻿
 Ebay.com. "About eBay." Accessed April 24, 2020. Amazon. "Amazon's fulfillment network." Accessed April 23, 2002. Statisa. "Percentage of paid units sold by third-party sellers on Amazon platform as of 4th quarter 2019." Accessed April 24, 2020. Ebay. "Listing durations and timings." Accessed April 24, 2020. Ebay. "How bidding works." Accessed April 24, 2020. Ebay. "Selling with Buy It Now." Accessed April 26, 2020. Ebay. "Start selling on eBay." Accessed April 24, 2020. Ebay. "Selling with Classified Ads." Accessed April 24, 2020. Amazon. "Pricing." Accessed April 24, 2020. Amazon. "Amazon Services Business Solutions Agreement." Accessed April 23, 2020. Ebay. "Selling fees." Accessed April 23, 2020. Amazon. "About Amazon Prime." Accessed April 23, 2020.