
Warren Buffett has been married twice. Buffett married his first wife, Susan, in 1952. They had three children and were married for over 50 years until Susan's death in 2004.﻿﻿
 
Although Warren and Susan had a long-lasting marriage, they were not together for all of it. They separated halfway through the marriage, in 1977, with Susan moving to San Francisco. Nevertheless, the two remained close, frequently talking on the phone even though they were apart.﻿﻿
 Berkshire Hathaway head honcho Warren Buffett has been married twice; Buffett's first wife, Susan, introduced him to his second wife, Astrid, after she and Buffett separated. 
Buffett's first wife had something to do with the business leader's next partner. Before her death, Susan introduced Warren to a waitress named Astrid Menks. Susan had asked Menks to check up on Warren while she was away. It was Menks who would later end up being Warren's companion and future wife. By 1978, Buffett and Menks were living together, and Christmas cards from the Buffett family were being sent out signed, "Warren, Susie, and Astrid."﻿﻿
 
In 2006 Warren Buffett and Menks officially got married. The Berkshire Hathaway CEO held a low-key ceremony at his daughter Susie Buffett's home in Omaha, Nebraska. No business leaders were present, nor were Buffett's two sons.﻿﻿
 
Although some may question the love triangle, friends remarked that the relationship between the three was sophisticated, and Susan was quoted with only good things to say about Menks.
 
"She takes great care of him, and he appreciates it and I appreciate it. She’s a wonderful person," Buffett's first wife said in an interview with Charlie Rose.﻿﻿ According to Warren, "Susie put me together, and Astrid keeps me together."﻿﻿
 
With a net worth of $67.3 billion, as of May 2020, Warren Buffett is the fourth-richest person in the world.﻿﻿ Buffett has made his fortune as the CEO and Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, which he formally took over in 1965, after having run the Buffett Partnership, which he formed in 1956.﻿﻿ Berkshire Hathaway is a conglomerate with holdings in multiple industries, including insurance, railroads, trucking, clothing, jewelry, furniture, and many others.
 
Buffett is known for his frugality, living in the same Omaha house that he bought in the 1950s. He is also known for his philanthropy, having given away more than $46 billion to a variety of causes over the last 20 years.﻿﻿ In 2006, he announced his plans to donate the bulk of his fortune to charity.﻿﻿ In 2010, Buffett and Bill Gates said that that they had formed The Giving Pledge campaign to encourage other wealthy people to pursue philanthropy.﻿﻿ 
 The Daily Mail. "Warren Buffett Breaks Down in Tears at Mention of His First Wife Who Died of Oral Cancer." Accessed May 13, 2020. The New York Times. "How Does Warren Buffett Get Married? Frugally, it Turns out." Accessed May 13, 2020. Time. "Warren Buffett Tells All: The Women in His Life." Accessed May 13, 2020. Forbes. "Warren Buffett." Accessed May 13, 2020. Biography. "Warren Buffett." Accessed May 13, 2020. CNBC. "Warren Buffett is the Most Charitable Billionaire." Accessed May 13, 2020. Fortune. "Warren Buffett Gives it Away." Accessed May 13, 2020.