
Jack Welch has attained legendary status in the business world and is considered by many of his peers and colleagues to be one of the greatest chief executive officers (CEOs) of all time. (See also: "Becoming a CEO.")
 
During his 20 years (1981-2001) of managing General Electric, as CEO and later as chairman, Welch's most notable achievement was increasing the market value of the firm. Welch increased it from approximately $12 billion when he took over, to a colossal $505 billion at the time of his retirement announcement in 1999, making GE the world's second largest company by market capitalization, exceeded only by Microsoft.
 
Along with Welch's unique, effective and sometimes brutal management style, a number of profitable strategic acquisitions under his leadership helped GE climb to the summit of the business world, with 10% or more earnings growth for many consecutive quarters. The most lucrative of Welch's acquisitions was the $6.4 billion paid for Radio Corporation of America (RCA), which owned NBC television.
 
The success story of GE under the energetic and visionary leadership of Jack Welch, however, is a complex narrative of managerial innovation and prescient strategic moves, which not only included the acquisition of companies, but also the selling of troubled firms owned by the enormous conglomerate, and the ruthless termination of managers who did not produce.
 
In business, as in life, there are no guarantees. But for businesses of any size, the management philosophy of Jack Welch may be applied equally, and the results will be positive.
 
The following analysis will describe the basic principles of the Welch management system. Within each principle are specifics, subtleties and case histories to which entire books have been devoted. These five points will address the larger picture.
 
The management principles described above are only a small sampling of Welch's comprehensive managerial style. Managers across the spectrum, from CEOs of large firms to owner-operators of small businesses may profit from implementing these ideas.
 
Welch's techniques for managing strategic and tactical moves, recruitment, compensation issues, research and development, financing, accounting, marketing and advertising, legal issues, employee relations and other human resources issues, among numerous other aspects of running of a business are beyond the scope of this article. (See also: "9 Tips for Growing a Successful Business.")
