
A micromanager is a boss or manager who gives excessive supervision to employees. A micromanager, rather than telling an employee what task needs to be accomplished and by when will watch the employee's actions closely and provide frequent criticism of the employee’s work and processes.
 
Micromanagement is a form of leadership that may produce results in the short-term, but it hurts employee and company morale over time. Usually, micromanaging has a negative connotation because an employee may feel that a micromanager is being condescending towards them, due to a perceived lack of faith in the employee's competency.
 
Also, a manager who implements this management style creates an environment where his team develops insecurity and a lack of confidence in its work. In the absence of the manager, the team may find it difficult to function.
 
A micromanager will usually use up most of his time supervising the work of his direct reports and exaggerating the importance of minor details to subordinates; time that could have been used to get other important things done. Although micromanagement is easily recognized by others in the firm, the micromanager may not view himself or herself as such.
 
In contrast to a micromanager, a macro manager is more effective in his or her management approach. Macro-managing defines broad tasks for direct reports to accomplish and then leaves them alone to do their work. Macro managers have confidence that the team can complete the same task without being continually reminded of the process.
 
Signs of micromanagers include but are not limited to:
 
From the list provided above, it is easy to understand that a micromanager struggles with meeting deadlines since work has to be redone repeatedly, and valuable time is spent poring over inconsequential details. Team members eventually become frustrated and resentful as their work is undermined at every stage and they have no autonomy over how to run an assigned project. Because team members' skills and development on the job are stunted, the micromanaging style of leadership is ineffective.
 
A micromanager who has identified himself or herself as such can take a number of steps to break this habit:
