
A new issue refers to a stock or bond offering that is made for the first time. Most new issues come from privately held companies that become public and present investors with new opportunities.
 
The typical route for a new issue via a stock offering is commonly known as an IPO (Initial Public Offering), where a company's stock is offered to the public through various exchanges, such as the NYSE or Nasdaq for the first time. New issues of bonds work the same way. Both forms of new issues are intended to raise capital for the issuing company.
 
 A new issue may be contrasted with a seasoned issue.
 
A new issue is conducted a means of raising capital for a company. Firms have two main choices: issuing debt (i.e. borrowing) or issuing equity in the form of stock (i.e. selling a portion of the company). Regardless of which route they take, they will be making a new issue when those securities are offered for sale. Governments will also create new issues of sovereign debt in the form of treasury securities in order to raise funds for government operations.
 
Using the debt route, i.e. issuing bonds, the new issue will be scrutinized based on the creditworthiness of the issuer to repay its obligations and its overall financial strength. If the firm is a startup with no revenue, issuing bonds may be an option that is not readily available.
 
However, the stock route may still be available if they are able to convince investors that the company has long term potential. This is where venture capital (VC) and private equity firms may become involved, helping the company to develop and thrive in exchange for ownership in the new firm. If successful, the company may then seek to make a new issue through an IPO and go public. Companies that are already public may originate another new issue later on via a secondary offering.
 There is a risk that there is frequent ‘hype’ around a new issue, sometimes causing a company's shares to surge after its IPO, and then only plummet after the hype has worn off. Investors need to be careful when investing in new issues.  
Say a new IT company has developed a program to make cash exchanges easily available worldwide. They have been successful in both generating revenue and with garnering interest from the venture capital community. To grow, however, they still believe they need more capital.
 
The company engages with investment banks to see what their shares could be worth on the open market, and the banks' underwriters indicate that $19 per share would be a fair IPO price, valuing the company at just under $100 million. The company’s board of directors agrees and they file for an IPO. With the new issue, the company raises sufficient capital and becomes listed on a stock exchange where its shares are freely tradeable.
