
The Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (PPPFA), signed into law by President Donald Trump on June 5, 2020, amends the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to give borrowers more freedom in how and when loan funds are spent while retaining the possibility of full forgiveness.﻿﻿
 
Under previous PPP loan guidance, borrowers had eight weeks from the time they received the first loan installment to spend the funds.﻿﻿ The PPP Flexibility Act of 2020 lets them extend that period to 24 weeks (but not beyond Dec. 31, 2020). They also have the option to keep the original eight-week spending period if they already had their loan before enactment of the Act. Under the new timeline, full forgiveness is still possible.﻿﻿
 
The original PPP loan guidelines mandated that 75% of any forgiven amount had to be spent on payroll costs.﻿﻿ The Flexibility Act reduces required payroll expenditures to 60% of the loan amount with up to 40% of the loan amount used for mortgage interest, rent, or utility payments to obtain full loan forgiveness of that amount. Or, part of the loan can be forgiven provided the borrower maintains the same 60/40 ratio for the amount forgiven.﻿﻿ This change reflects complaints from many businesses that their payroll costs went down as employees were laid off but fixed costs like rent did not.
 
Borrowers can now use the new 24-week period to restore their workforce to pre-COVID-19 levels in order to obtain full forgiveness. The new deadline to achieve this is Dec. 31, 2020 vs. the previous deadline of June 30, 2020.﻿﻿
 
New legislation signed by the president July 4, 2020, extends the deadline to apply for a Paycheck Protection Program Loan through Aug. 8, 2020.﻿﻿ The original application deadline was June 30, 2020. 
 
The new legislation involves $134 billion in unspent PPP funds when the application process shut down at the end of June. Those funds are once again available giving Congress time to decide how to re-appropriate anything left after August 8. At the same time, lawmakers continue to discuss additional small business funding as part of Phase 4 Coronavirus legislation.
 
Two new exceptions let borrowers achieve full forgiveness even if they don't fully restore their workforce. These are in addition to previous guidance that let companies exclude workers who turned down good-faith offers of re-employment. Borrowers can now also reduce workforce requirements based on the inability to find qualified employees or if they were unable to restore operations to Feb. 15, 2020, levels due to COVID-19 restrictions.﻿﻿
 Changes made by the PPPFA have been fully incorporated in new loan forgiveness applications posted on the SBA website. 
The PPP loan repayment period has been extended to five years from the original two while retaining the original 1% interest rate.﻿﻿ This gives borrowers more time to pay off the unforgiven portion of their loan.
 
The payment deferment period (principal, interest, fees) is now extended from six months after the end of the covered period to the date the SBA sends the borrower's loan forgiveness amount to the lender. If the borrower does not apply for forgiveness, the deferral period lasts until 10 months after the end of the covered period, according to guidance issued by the SBA on June 8, 2020.﻿﻿
 
Finally, the PPP Flexibility Act of 2020 lets businesses that took a PPP loan also delay paying their payroll taxes.﻿﻿ This was not allowed under the original CARES Act.﻿﻿
 
The SBA, in consultation with the Treasury Department, issued additional PPPFA guidance Aug. 4, 2020, which sets the maximum amount of compensation that can be counted toward forgiveness for anyone with an ownership interest in an S corporation, C corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship (Schedule C business) at the lesser of $20,833 or 2.5 months' worth of their 2019 compensation. This cap applies cumulatively to all companies that pay the owner/employee. The $20,833 cap applies to a "covered period" of 10.6 weeks or more. If the company elects an 8-week covered period, the cap will be the lessor of $15,385 or eight weeks' worth of 2019 compensation.﻿﻿
 
Additional highlights from the Aug. 4 guidance include the following:
 
The new PPP Flexibility Act has received a largely positive response from experts, mostly for the extended spending deadline and retooled payroll costs guidance, although the shift from "75% of the forgiven amount" to "60% of the total loan amount" has some worried that the new requirement will cause many businesses to obtain no forgiveness now where they would have obtained at least some in the past.
 
Amanda Ballantyne, executive director of the Main Street Alliance, called for additional support above and beyond what she refers to as a "first step in addressing the design flaws of the PPP." Noting that "Most small businesses have already spent their eight weeks of PPP funding," Ballantyne and the Alliance urge a "comprehensive longer-term solution that recognizes the financial crisis COVID-19 has created for small business and our entire economy."
 U.S. Congress. "H.R. 7010 - Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020." Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Small Business Administration. "Paycheck Protection Program Borrower Application Form." Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Small Business Administration. "Paycheck Protection Program." Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Department of Treasury. "Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Information Sheet: Borrowers," page 4. Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Department of Treasury. "Small Business Paycheck Protection Program," page 1. Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Senate. "S.4116 - A bill to extend the authority for commitments for the paycheck protection program and separate amounts authorized for other loans under section 7(a) of the Small Business Act, and for other purposes." Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Small Business Administration. "Joint Statement Issued by SBA Administrator and Treasury Secretary." Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Congress. "H.R. 748 - CARES Act." Accessed Aug. 29, 2020. U.S. Small Business Administration. "Paycheck Protection Program: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on PPP Loan Forgiveness," pages 4-5. Accessed Aug. 29, 2020.