
Probable maximum loss (PML) is the maximum loss that an insurer would be expected to incur on a policy. Probable maximum loss (PML) is most often associated with insurance policies on property, such as fire insurance or flood insurance. The probable maximum loss (PML) represents the worst-case scenario for an insurer and helps determine the premiums that a policyholder will have to pay on their insurance policy.
 
Insurance companies use a wide variety of data sets, including probable maximum loss (PML), when determining the risk associated with underwriting a new insurance policy, a process that also helps set the premium. Insurers review past loss experience for similar perils, demographic and geographic risk profiles, and industry-wide information to set the premium. An insurer assumes that a portion of the policies that it underwrites will incur losses, but that the bulk of policies will not. An insurance company must always ensure that it has enough funds to pay out claims on policies, and the probable maximum loss in one of many metrics that helps determine the amount of funds required.
 
Insurance companies differ on what probable maximum loss means. At least three different approaches to PML exist:
 
Commercial insurance underwriters use probable maximum loss calculations to estimate the highest maximum claim that a business most likely will file, versus what it could file, for damages resulting from a catastrophic event. Underwriters use complex statistical formulas and frequency distribution charts to estimate PML and use this information as a starting point in negotiating favorable commercial insurance rates.
 
There are several steps in calculating PML:
 
The example above is a simplified version and the more risk mitigating factors that a property has, the further the probable maximum loss will be reduced. Most properties are at risk of damage by a variety of means and so ensuring protection against all variables will not only benefit an insurance company in the amount they will have to cover in case of a catastrophic event, but it will also reduce the premiums a policyholder will have to pay.
