
A social networking service (SNS) is an online vehicle for creating relationships with other people who share an interest, background, or real relationship. Social networking service users create a profile with personal information and photos and form connections with other profiles.
 
These users then use their connection to grow relationships through sharing, emailing, instant messaging, and commenting. Social networking services may also be referred to as a "social networking site" or simply "social media."
 
The first SNS, SixDegrees.com was started in 1997 and was soon followed by Friendster, MySpace, and Facebook.﻿﻿ Today, there are a wide range of SNS and nearly 80% of Americans have SNS profiles.﻿﻿ SNS range from sites where users have general interests to those where users have very specific interests.
 
Successful specialized SNS include YouTube, Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn, Reddit, Snapchat, Tumblr, Pinterest, and TikTok. SNS profiles are very popular across the globe. Facebook alone boasts over 2.7 billion users worldwide.﻿﻿
 
The social networking service business model is based on online advertising, either through targeted advertising that utilizes an individual's personal information, search habits, location or other such data, or by selling the personal information to third parties. Ubiquitous mobile technologies, such as smartphones and tablets, have helped the growth of social SNS adoption and use.
 
While social networking services may take many forms, they share several characteristics, such as all utilizing the internet. Other similar characteristics include:
 
Some users worry about the security of SNS profiles, as seen in the March 2018 revelations about how Cambridge Analytica, a political information firm, illegally harvested information from roughly 50 million profiles of U.S. users to target for highly politicized content.﻿﻿
 
In addition to potential leaks of personal information, including tax and personal identification information, SNS users who are not careful about their privacy settings find that strangers can track their movements or see questionable photos.
 
This is especially a concern for job seekers whose potential employers might search for their profiles as part of the hiring process. Social networking service overuse may lead to depression and anxiety. Such services may also facilitate bullying and other risks to child safety.
 DigitalTrends. "The history of social networking." Accessed Sept. 12, 2020. Statista. "Percentage of U.S. population who currently use social media from 2008 to 2019." Accessed Sept. 12, 2020. Statista. "Number of monthly active Facebook users worldwide as of 2nd quarter 2020." Accessed Sept. 12, 2020. The New York Times. "Facebook and Cambridge Analytica: What You Need to Know as Fallout Widens." Accessed Sept. 12, 2020.