
Ever get the feeling there is nothing worth watching on television, despite there being 100+ channels? That same paradox is even more significant on the web, given the enormous and ever-increasing amount of Internet content.
 
Taboola is a web-based platform that attempts to create a solution in the online content marketplace. Taboola's tagline, “content you may like,” conveys a lot about its business philosophy. Recommending and connecting people to sites that may resonate with them is the core of Taboola’s business. The service appeals to audiences who don’t know what they are looking for (and the majority of habitual internet users, including educated ones, frequently fall in this category). The founder of Taboola, Adam Singolda, in an interview with Forbes, explained it this way: “I realized that there are three ways people got to consume content: (1) Search: if they knew what they were looking for and could type it (2) Social: if a friend of theirs shared it (3) Opportunistic: they just happened to be on a page, or they happened to open their TV– what’s next? I was very passionate about solving (3), and connecting people around the world with content they may like."
 
In essence, Taboola claims to be the reverse of search engine results. While search engines provide precisely what the user is searching for, Taboola recommends content proactively based on user’s preferences, which are, in turn, based on Taboola's sophisticated algorithms. 
 
Founded in Israel, the firm is currently headquartered in New York and has offices in Bangkok, London, Pasadena, and Tel-Aviv.
 
Taboola offers a content marketing service that connects content creators with content publishers. Available tools and technology includes web-based widgets titled "Content You May Like," “You May Also Like,” "Recommended for You," or similar. These widgets carry pictures and links to related content (video, image-based slideshows, or articles) and are placed by content publishers on their sites. The linked content can be internal (from the publisher's website or network), as well as external (leading to other sites), for which the publishers get paid a share of advertising revenue. Current publishers include sites like The Huffington Post, Time, USA Today, The Weather Channel and Investopedia, among many others. 
 
On the other side are the content creators: customers who use Taboola to drive traffic to their sites and act as advertisers who pay for this incoming traffic. These are the sites for which links can be seen in the web widgets put up on the publisher’s website.
 
Advertisers may also be publishers (and vice versa), depending on their specific website business model.
 
The players in content marketing marketplace:
 
According to Taboola's site, it has 150 billion monthly recommendations, 400 million unique visitors, and more than one million content pieces. And according to ComScore, Taboola reaches more desktop users in the US than Facebook, Inc. (FB).
 
In the content marketing business, the intermediary, like Taboola, is the controlling authority that:
 
For providing this marketplace, Taboola collects a promotion fee from content creators/advertisers and shares some of its percentage with publishers. It is not known what percentage is paid to publishers and speculative estimates vary, but considering the high penetration on popular portals, it is assumed to be attractive enough to keep such publishers engaged. Taboola's earnings are also unknown. However, Taboola and similar companies are considered a threat to traditional context-based offerings such as Google's AdSense.
 
Not all bodes well for this advertising revenue generation business. Of concern are the following:
 
To circumvent these problems and allegations, Taboola has engaged in technical improvements through its algorithms and including a mandatory disclosure that is promptly displayed. It also defends content based on the user’s choices.
 
Another challenge is that people’s behavior differs on the Internet and real life, with many who might not pursue such topics offline keen to click on links to “Reduce Weight Quickly” or “Get Rich Quick” guide.
 
(figures and timelines, courtesy of CrunchBase)
 
Technical advances will need to continue to be integrated and enhanced for the company to remain in business and win the trust of end-users and publishers. A few of key features include:
 
Having penetrated the larger publisher networks, Taboola's new opportunities may lie in the small, niche publishers, which offer limited traffic but may have a large enough segment to complement other clients.
 
While the online advertisement space remains dominated by Google AdSense, Taboola offers a unique variation, generating business from recommendation-based proactive advertising. Any online business runs the risk of quick customer loss and of going from boom to bust, as a result of an inability to deal with recurring or new issues (such as spam control) or of developments in competition, such as the entry of new, innovative players offering better solutions. How Taboola and its competitors innovate will shape the online advertising arena. 
