
If risk is like a smoldering coal that may spark a fire at any moment, insurance is civilization's fire extinguisher.
 
The main concept of insurance—that of spreading risk among many—has been around as long as human existence. Whether it was hunting giant elk in a group to spread the risk of being the one gored to death or shipping cargo in several different caravans to avoid losing the whole shipment to a marauding tribe, people have always been wary of risk.
 
Countries and their citizens need to spread risk among large numbers of people and to move risk to entities that can handle it. This is how insurance emerged.
 
The first written insurance policy appeared in ancient times on a Babylonian monument with the code of King Hammurabi carved into it. The Hammurabi Code was one of the first examples of written laws.﻿﻿
 
These ancient laws were extreme in most respects, but one offered basic insurance in that a debtor didn't have to pay back their loans if some personal catastrophe made it impossible (disability, death, flooding, etc.).﻿﻿
 
In the Dark and Middle Ages, most craftsmen were trained through the guild system. Apprentices spent their childhoods working for masters for little or no pay. Once they became masters themselves, they paid dues to the guild and trained their own apprentices.
 
The wealthier guilds had large coffers that acted as a type of insurance fund.﻿﻿ If a master's practice burned down—a common occurrence in the wooden hovels of medieval Europe—the guild would rebuild it using money from its coffers. If a master was robbed, the guild would cover their obligations until money started to flow in again. If a master was suddenly disabled or killed, the guild would support them or their surviving family.
 
This safety net encouraged more people to leave farming to take up trades. As a result, the amount of goods available for trade increased, as did the range of goods and services available. The style of insurance used by guilds is still around today in the form of group coverage. (For related reading, see: Individual vs. Group Health Insurance: What's the Difference?)
 
In the late 1600s, shipping was just beginning between the New World and the old as colonies were being established and exotic goods were ferried back. The practice of underwriting emerged in the same London coffeehouses that operated as the unofficial stock exchange for the British Empire.﻿﻿ A coffeehouse owned by Edward Lloyd, later of Lloyd's of London, was the primary meeting place for merchants, ship owners and others seeking insurance.﻿﻿
 
A basic system for funding voyages to the New World was established. In the first stage, merchants and companies would seek funding from venture capitalists. The venture capitalists would help find people who wanted to be colonists, usually those from the more desperate areas of London, and would purchase provisions for the voyage.
 
In exchange, the venture capitalists were guaranteed some of the returns from the goods the colonists would produce or find in the Americas. It was widely believed you couldn't take two left turns in America without finding a deposit of gold or other precious metals. When it turned out this wasn't exactly true, venture capitalists still funded voyages for a share of the new bumper crop: tobacco. 
 
After the voyage was secured by venture capitalists, the merchants and ship owners went to Lloyd's to hand over a copy of the ship's cargo to so the investors and underwriters who gathered there could read it. The people interested in taking on the risk for a set premium signed at the bottom of the manifest beneath the figure indicating the share of the cargo for which they were taking responsibility (hence, underwriting). In this way, a single voyage would have multiple underwriters who tried to spread their own risk by taking shares in several different voyages.
 
By 1654, Blaise Pascal, the Frenchman who gave us the first calculator, and his countryman Pierre de Fermat, discovered a way to express probabilities and thereby understand levels of risk.﻿﻿ Pascal's triangle led to the first actuary tables that were, and still are, used when calculating insurance rates. These formalized the practice of underwriting and made insurance more affordable. (For related reading, see: How is my insurance premium calculated?)
 
In 1666, the great fire of London destroyed more than 13,000 buildings.﻿﻿ London was still recovering from the plague that ravaged it a year earlier,﻿﻿ and many survivors found themselves without homes. As a response to the chaos and outrage that followed the burning of London, groups of underwriters who had dealt exclusively in marine insurance formed companies that offered fire insurance.﻿﻿
 
Armed with Pascal's triangle, these companies quickly expanded their range of business. By 1693, the first mortality table was created using Pascal's triangle, and life insurance soon followed.﻿﻿ (For related reading, see: Five Insurance Policies Everyone Should Have.)
 
Insurance companies thrived in Europe, especially after the Industrial Revolution. In America, the story was very different. Colonists' lives were fraught with dangers that no insurance company would touch. As a result of lack of food, armed conflicts with indigenous people, and disease, almost three out of every four colonists died in the Jamestown settlement between 1609 - 1610, "The Starving Time."﻿﻿
 
It took more than 100 years for insurance to establish itself in America.﻿﻿ When it finally did, it brought the maturity in both practice and policies developed during that same period of time in Europe. (For related reading, see: The History of Insurance in America.)
 Risk Engineering. "Insurance and risk: some history." Accessed May 6, 2020. Swiss Reinsurance Company Ltd. "A History of Insurance," Page 6. Accessed May 5, 2020. R. Tee Williams. "An Introduction to Trading in the Financial Markets: Market Basics," Page 29. Academic Press, 2010. Accessed May 6, 2020. Lloyd's of London. "Corporate History." Accessed May 6, 2020. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Blaise Pascal." Accessed May 6, 2020. London Fire Brigade. "The Great Fire of London." Accessed May 6, 2020. The National Archives. "Great Plague of 1665 - 1666." Accessed May 6, 2020. Museum of London. "How the Great Fire of London Created Insurance." Accessed May 6, 2020. V.T. Covello, Joshua Menkes, and J.L. Mumpower. "Risk Evaluation and Management," Page 521. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. Accessed May 6, 2020. Encyclopedia Virginia. "The Starving Time." Accessed May 6, 2020. Encyclopaedia Britannica. "Historical Development of Insurance." Accessed May 6, 2020.