
Lowe’s Companies Inc. (LOW) is an American home retailing company that provides customers with an extensive range of home improvement products, including home decorating, repair, remodeling, property maintenance, and installation services. Lowe's offers its products and services to both retail and wholesale customers. Lowe's reported fiscal third-quarter earnings on November 20, 2018. The home retailing company reported $17.42 billion in revenues this quarter, reflecting a 3.8% increase from the same period last year.
 
On Nov. 5, 2018, Lowe's announced that the company will close 51 underperforming stores in North America, with 20 locations in the U.S. and 31 in Canada. Lowe's will close the locations by Feb. 1, 2019, says CEO Marvin R. Ellison, as part of the company's efforts to focus "on its most profitable stores and improve the overall health of its store portfolio." The store closures come as the most recent update from Lowe's Companies, whose CEO of 13 years Robert Niblock retired in March. Lowe's Companies is now headed by Ellison, former CEO of J.C. Penney.
 
Following news of the store closures, Lowe's announced on Dec. 12, 2018 that the company would buy back $10 billion in company stock. Lowe's shares were down about 1.5% leading up to the company announcement and shot up by nearly 3% in afternoon trading. The company buyback suggests that the company may be confident heading into fiscal year 2019, despite shares having fallen about 5 percent so far this year.
 
Throughout the company's business and structural changes, Lowe's has remained committed to the belief that a diverse portfolio of products better meets customer needs. Most of Lowe's 106 suppliers are located within the United States, but the company also has suppliers based in South Korea, Canada, China, and Taiwan. Here are the company's four largest suppliers of Lowe's as of Dec. 12, 2018. 
 
Advanced Environmental Recycling Technologies Inc. (OTC: AERT) is an American producer manufacturing company. It develops and commercializes recycling technology solutions and green building compounds. Advanced Environmental Recycling Technologies supplies Lowe’s with technologies to recycle waste polyethylene plastics, along with branded do-it-yourself (DIY) decking products. In March of 2017, AERT was bought by Oldcastle Architectural for around $117 million. Oldcastle bought the company to get into the competitive decking market. Advanced Environmental Recycling Technologies generates approximately 50% of its revenue through business with Lowe's. Oldcastle's parent company CRH has a market cap of $21.17 billion as of Dec. 12, 2018.
 
Shenzhen Jiawei Photovoltaic Lighting Co. Ltd. (SHE: 300317.SZ) is a Chinese production and manufacturing company that develops, manufactures and sells solar energy and light-emitting diode (LED) combined photovoltaic lighting products. Shenzhen Jiawei Photovoltaic Lighting supplies Lowe’s with home garden products that include solar lawn lamps and solar courtyard lamps. The company generates 35.19% of its revenue through Lowe’s and boasts a market cap of $4.44 billion as of Dec. 12, 2018.
 
Hangzhou Great Star Industrial Co. Ltd. (SHE: 002444.SZ) is a Chinese consumer durables company. It is involved primarily in research, development, manufacture and distribution of hardware products. Hangzhou Great Star Industrial supplies Lowe’s with hand tools, lithium battery electric tools, lithium-ion batteries, car protection and machinery tools, landscape and outdoor tools, and floor and tile tools. The company generates 27.37% of its revenue from Lowe's. Hangzhou Great Star Industrial had a market capitalization of $10.86 billion as of Dec. 12, 2018.
 
Primo Water Corporation (NASDAQ: PRMW) is an American consumer non-durables company that provides Lowe's with water bottles and water dispensers. The water manufacturer produces filtered water through the installation and servicing of water filtration systems and generates 19% of its revenue from Lowe’s. Primo has a market capitalization of $541.03 million as of Dec. 12, 2018.
