
Koch Industries was founded by Fred Koch in 1940 and is majority owned by his sons, better known as the Koch Brothers—David and Charles, with each owning 42% of the company. David, 79 years old, stepped down from his role with the company in 2018 due to health issues, while Charles, 83, remains Chairman and CEO.
 
Koch Industries is the second-largest privately held company in the U.S., per Forbes annual rankings, generating $110 billion in annual revenues. This has helped position the Koch family as the second richest family in the world, behind only the Walton family (Walmart owners). The Bloomberg Billionaires Index puts the Walton family fortune at $152 billion, while the Koch family is worth $99 billion.
 
At the age of 27, a chemical engineer by the name of Fred Koch developed a new and more efficient process for turning crude oil into gasoline. An MIT graduate, Fred had invented a new method of refining gasoline from viscous and common heavy oil. After a string of lawsuits from Universal Oil Products, which had patented and was licensing a similar technique, Fred brought his innovation to the Soviet Union 1929. He returned to America shortly after to start a family.
 
A little more than a decade after making his discovery, Koch used the improved process to start an oil refinery business of his own. The company was initially called Wood River Oil and Refining Company, then later became Rock Island Oil and Refining Company before finally being renamed Koch Industries.
 
Fred Koch was an early and active member of the John Birch Society, a vehement and vocal anti-communist group popular in America after World War II. Charles was also involved with the group until 1968, a year after his father died. The group’s support of the Vietnam War is what finally drove Charles to leave.  He left the group with a bang when he and another John Birch member took out a full-page ad in the May 1968 Wichita Eagle with the headline, “Let’s Get Out of Vietnam Now.”
 
Since then, the company has expanded its operations beyond oil refining into industries such as agriculture and consumer goods manufacturing. Fast forward to today, Koch Industries generates annual sales of $119 billion and is the second-largest privately held company in the U.S. In 1961, the company was worth $21 million. This equates to a 57-year cumulative return of more than 476,000%. To put that into perspective, the Standard & Poor's 500 Index increased roughly 4,210% between Jan. 1, 1961 and Jan. 1, 2019. As of June 2019, Koch Industries had 120,000 employees worldwide.
 
All of Fred Koch's four sons have become billionaires as a result of the unprecedented growth of the family business. The two brothers are the only members of the family's second generation who still play an active role in the management of the company.
 There are four Koch brothers, but only two—Charles and David—remain owners of Koch Industries, with Frederick and William having sold their stakes in 1983. 
Following the death of his father Fred in 1967, Charles Koch assumed the role of chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) of Rock Island Oil. He was 32 years old at the time and had been working in the company for a little more than five years. Before his death, Fred Koch had experienced some heart-related health issues, and as such, had been preparing his son, Charles, for an eventual handover of management, should anything happen to him.
 
During a New York magazine interview, David Koch briefly spoke about his father’s unfortunate death. He mentioned, “Father was on a hunting trip bird-shooting in Utah. He was in a blind with a gun loader next to him. He was having heart palpitations and wasn’t shooting that well. Finally, a lone bird came over. He took the shot and hit it square. The duck falls from the air. He turns to the loader and says, ‘Boy, that was a magnificent shot,’ and then keels over dead.”
 
Despite having wealthy parents, the Koch brothers were raised in an environment that taught them the importance of hard work. Charles is famous for saying that his father never wanted his boys “to turn into country-club bums.” As a result, they were required to spend their spare time working while attending school. In the book, Sons of Wichita, Daniel Schulman wrote, “He [Fred] put them [his sons] to work milking cows, bailing hay, digging ditches, mowing lawns, and whatever else he could think of.”
 
With that being said, it is still true that the Koch brothers were given a head start when they inherited their father’s business. The company was valued at $21 million a few years before his death in 1961. Additionally, the company already owned several stakes in oil refineries throughout the country.
 
Charles continued to expand the company after taking over as CEO by engaging in a series of strategic acquisitions of oil and energy-related companies, such as refineries and pipeline operations. Throughout the history of Koch Industries, the company has reinvested 90% of its net earnings into growing the business.
 Charles Koch changed the name of the family business from Rock Island Oil to Koch Industries to honor his father after his death. 
David Koch, the younger brother of Charles Koch, joined the company as a technical service manager in 1970, and he quickly rose through the ranks, ultimately becoming the president of Koch's engineering division by 1978.
 
At the dawn of the 1990s, Koch Industries began to invest in sectors that were outside of the oil and gas space. In 1995, the company established a $150 million venture capital fund to invest in startups. A short list of core industries in which the Kochs have invested over the years includes petroleum, chemicals, ranching, finance and trading, especially commodities, fertilizers, architecture, paper, transportation, and distribution.
 
Charles has employed a Market-Based Management style at Koch Industries, where the organizational structure is kept flat to allow ideas to flow freely and quickly.
 
According to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Koch Industries is "a collection of capabilities continually searching for new ways to create value," and each subsidiary "strives to bring the power of the free-market inside its business to maximize productivity and adaptability."
 
Koch Industries' Landmark purchases include the $22 billion acquisition of Georgia-Pacific in 2005, bringing in Quilted Northern toilet paper, Brawny paper towels, and Dixie cups to the business. In December 2012, Koch Industries spent $7.2 billion to purchase Molex, a global electronic components manufacturer. The company was notable given its major client, Apple (AAPL). The deal raised eyebrows because of its sky-high valuation, as $7.2 billion was roughly 30 times Molex's earnings at the time of the purchase.
 
Koch Industries partnered with Goldman Sachs (GS) in April 2014 to purchase a printing ink manufacturer called Flint Group for $3 billion. In November of that same year, Koch Industries paid $445 million to acquire Oplink Communications, a producer of optical components.
 
In 2015, Koch Industries contributed $100 million to an investment fund launched by Eaglehill Capital Partners LP. The fund is set up to help private equity takeovers of small-to-medium-sized businesses, mostly through debt financing.
 
Other brothers, Frederick and William Koch, have not been involved with Koch Industries for many decades. The two brothers sold their shares to Charles and David and in exchange received $700 million. Frederick and William did partake in public disputes and a lawsuit over the years against Charles and David, claiming they were short-changed during the 1983 buyout of their stakes. The lawsuit has since been settled. 
 
Frederick has since moved to Monaco and now collects art, while William serves as the CEO of Oxbow, an energy company he founded after selling his stake in Koch Industries. As of June 2019, Oxbow was the 184th largest privately held company in the United States with $2.5 billion in annual revenue.
 The combined fortune of the Koch brothers, America's second wealthiest family; the vast majority of their fortune is invested in the family-owned Koch Industries. 
Charles and David Koch are sometimes referred to as "GOP kingmakers." They have given millions of dollars to the campaigns of Republican candidates over the years. Their organizations provide grants to more than 250 colleges and universities for research and education programs, including the Institute for Humane Studies, which promotes individual liberty and free market economics. The Charles Koch Institute offers professional education programs to help individuals "successfully advance economic freedom through their careers." It actively seeks doctoral students to advance academic research in the fields of "free societies" and "human well being and prosperity."
 
According to a Politico article, the Koch brothers have invested more in politics than virtually any other individuals in America. The article also noted that their advocacy groups employed 1,200 full-time staffers in 107 offices in the U.S., more than three times the size of the Republican National Committee (RNC).
 
David spoke about his interests in politics during a 2014 interview with The Associated Press. He said, "[His father] was extraordinarily fearful of our government becoming much more socialistic and domineering... So from the time we [David and his brothers] were teenagers to the present, we’ve been very concerned and worried about our government evolving into a very controlling, socialist type of government.”
 
Fred Koch was an active member of the John Birch Society, a group dedicated to fighting communism. Charles helped co-found the Cato Institute in 1977, which is a think tank that supports libertarian causes, such as civil liberty protections.
 
All four of the Koch brothers have, at one time or another, been diagnosed with prostate cancer.
 
They have apparently taken the threat seriously, funding a number of cancer research and treatment centers, including the Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT. The state-of-the-art cancer research facility is the hub of cancer research at the university. The Koch Institute draws on faculty from multiple departments, including the MIT School of Engineering.
 
In addition, Charles Koch and his brothers donated more than $150 million to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center to build an outpatient facility with state-of-the-art technology and techniques. That’s on top of the $66.7 million he donated to support cancer research.
 
To better understand and combat cancer, the Koch brothers have also given $20 million to Johns Hopkins University, and $26.5 million to the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, for the David H. Koch Center for Applied Research of Genitourinary Cancers.
 
Koch’s political advocacy has made many enemies over the years, including Greenpeace, which used its blimp to fly over one of the Koch brothers’ political strategy meetings with a banner that read "Koch Brothers: Dirty Money." The group estimates that the Koch brothers spent $79,048,951 on research and advocacy that Greenpeace deems “climate change denial,” since 1997.
 
In a 2015 USA Today interview, Charles Koch referred to global climate change fears as "hysteria."
 
In the same interview, Koch made the much-publicized statement "You can plausibly say that CO2 has contributed" to the planet's warming, but he sees "no evidence" to support "this theory that it's going to be catastrophic."
