
BP Plc (NYSE: BP) is one of the world’s largest integrated oil and gas companies, known as a large dividend stock. In addition to its involvement in oil and gas, BP engages in producing renewable energy through the wind farms that it owns.﻿﻿
 
The company also produces a variety of petrochemical products. With respect to the natural gas and oil supply chain, BP is involved in almost every step, from exploration to the sale and marketing of energy products.﻿﻿ BP also owns fuel stations and retail concepts associated with fuel stations. Here are the top four companies owned by BP.
 
Castrol is a U.K.-based producer of industrial and automotive lubricants for a global market. The company was acquired by BP in 2002. Castrol lubricants are sold in automotive stores and gas stations in over 150 countries. It makes sense for BP to sell its own lubricants at its gas stations.﻿﻿ Many drivers check and top-off their oil when they fill up with gasoline. By selling its own lubricants at its gas stations, BP makes even more money from its customers.
 
Aral is a well-known brand of fuel stations in Germany and Luxembourg owned by Aral AG, which is a BP-owned company. There are approximately 2,500 Aral stations in Germany,﻿﻿ making it the largest gas station chain in the country with a 24% market share. Aral stations offer fuel and diesel to customers and may also offer natural gas and propane.
 
Many Aral stations also have a car wash and retail store. The retail stores provide convenience items and food through Aral's food store, Petit Bistro. There are 1,200 Petit Bistros in existence, and they offer snacks, meals, and beverages, including fresh, sustainably harvested coffee. These bistros are so prevalent and popular that Aral is Germany's third-largest fast-food retailer after McDonald's and Burger King.
 
In 2000, BP America purchased most of ARCO’s assets, and ARCO was integrated under the BP name. Many gas stations, even those owned by BP, are still branded as ARCO. Through this purchase, BP also took ownership of the convenience store, ampm. These stores are now found associated with both ARCO- and BP-branded gas stations and offer grab-n-go sandwiches and snacks among other items. Select stores even sell beer (where legally available). There are about 950 ampm stores in America across California, Oregon, Washington, Nevada, and Arizona.﻿﻿
 The rough number of gas stations BP owns worldwide. 
In October 2017, BP announced the reintroduction of Amoco, the BP brand for the U.S. fuel retail sector. Originally called Standard Oil of Indiana, by 1912, Amoco was the largest natural gas producer in North America. Amoco and BP merged in 1998, and BP Amoco became the largest producer of both oil and natural gas in the United States. In 2001, Amoco was renamed BP but is now to reappear in the United States once again as Amoco.﻿﻿
 
Hungry motorists who stop to refuel their cars can also refuel themselves with to-go foods and freshly ground coffee at Wild Bean Cafes. These cafes are commonly found in BP Connect stations in Europe, Australia, South Africa, China, and Russia. Wild Bean Cafe stores have been in existence since 2001.﻿﻿
 
All of the companies owned by BP help the company increase its revenues from the sale of its main product: fuel. BP gas station customers can purchase Castrol lubricants, while ampm, Wildbean Cafe, and Petit Bistros sell food and beverages to motorists visiting BP-branded gas stations including Aral.
 
Although BP is not the outright owner, it is the largest shareholder after the Russian government of Rosneft Oil Company (OTC: OJSCY).﻿﻿ Rosneft serves as the leader of Russia’s petroleum industry and remains the world’s largest publicly traded petroleum company.﻿﻿ BP and Rosneft have a joint-venture agreement to develop prospective resources in East and West Siberia.﻿﻿
 BP. "Wind Energy. " Accessed June 10, 2020. BP. "What We Do. " Accessed June 10, 2020. BP. "Castrol. " Accessed June 10, 2020. BP. "Global Products and Services. " Accessed June 11, 2020. BP. "AmPm. " Accessed June 11, 2020. BP. "Our Brands. " Accessed June 11, 2020. BP. "Wild Bean Cafe. " Accessed June 11, 2020. Rosneft. "Shareholder Structure." Accessed June 11, 2020. Rosneft. "Rosneft At a Glance." Accessed June 11, 2020. BP. "BP and Rosneft Create Joint Venture to Develop Prospective Resources in East and West Siberia." Accessed June 11, 2020.