
Amazon’s Prime membership program has emerged as a very popular scheme that saw great levels of adoption among online shoppers. For a flat fee of $12.99 per month, or $119 per year, the program offers a number of benefits. It includes fast, free two-day shipping with flexible delivery options on over 100 million items including two-hour or one-hour delivery in select locations for household items. Prime subscribers can also stream or download Prime media content covering thousands of popular songs, movies, TV shows, games, and audiobooks. Shopping benefits and rewards including 5% back for members with Amazon Prime Rewards Visa Card, Alexa-assisted shopping, early access to exclusive brands and deals, free subscription to thousands of top Kindle books and magazines, and even unlimited storage for photos.
 
But competitors are not far behind in offering similar schemes. Here's a list of top alternatives to Amazon Prime.
 
The leading online retailer that sells appliances, baby supplies, books, clothing, electronics, furniture, household items, groceries, audio-video, office supplies, personal care products, and pet supplies offers free membership for its Target REDCard credit or debit cardholders. REDcard holders pay no annual fee but receive a 5% discount on purchases and early access to new product releases. One can avail of same-day delivery through the Shipt app, and free two-day delivery on a minimum purchase of $35 through REDCard shopping. Target allows a longer 90-day return policy on select, unopened items, though electronics and entertainment items must be returned within 30 days, and mobiles within 14 days of purchase. The drive-up pick-up option provisions for a Target team member to load the car's trunk of the subscriber.
 
The leading retail giant also offers free membership as an Amazon Prime competitor. It offers free two-day shipping on qualifying items on a minimum bill of $35, and up to five-day shipping on other orders. Bulky or heavy orders qualify for freight shipping. While returns are available up to a period of 90 days of purchase, the return policy varies by the department. Walmart credit cardholders can earn up to 3% back on online and grocery purchases. Purchases made through the Walmart grocery app allows the subscriber to schedule a pick-up time, and a Walmart team member will help load groceries in the trunk.
 
The Hoboken, New Jersey-headquartered American e-commerce company offers its membership program free of cost. On eligible items with a minimum purchase worth $35, Jet.com offers free two-day shipping and free five-day shipping on other items. The program also offers a 30-day return policy, which the customers can swap with an offer to receive an additional discount on their purchases. In the latter case, a charge of a $5.99 shipping fee plus 5% of the item price will be levied for returns. The program includes one- and two-day delivery options under the Jet Fresh grocery delivery service which ships grocery items all days a week.
 
Wish is a popular e-commerce application that offers really cheap deals on a range of items, from shoes to clothing, bags, jewelry, home items, for children, and more. Over 500 million people use the app and similar to Amazon, Wish has a lot of sellers based in other countries that supply the item for low prices--though you may also get the corresponding quality. Though not the same as Amazon Prime, WishPlus is a monthly subscription plan that credits subscribers with $6 in Wish Cash monthly. It costs $4.79/month, meaning you are getting some free credit if you're committed to purchasing through Wish.
 
With offers of a variety of products from apparel to jewelry from more than 100 brands, ShopRunner offers free membership to PayPal members, Mastercard World, and World Elite cardholders, and American Express U.S. Consumer and Small Business cardholders. Others are required to pay a fee of $79, though shoppers can avail of a free one-month long trial membership. The program offers free two-day shipping with no minimum purchase amount at its 100-plus participating stores. Subscribers can return the items for free.
