
A twit pitch is a slang term used to describe an overview of a startup company, a product, or a service that is short enough to fit in the character limitations of the social networking website Twitter.
 
A Twit pitch is an electronic version of the elevator pitch, which is used by startup founders to sell their idea or business concept to investors in hopes of capturing their interest on the road to winning startup capital. The idea is that the investor should be able to understand the idea and see its potential in the time it takes to ride an elevator (presumably alongside some venture capitalist)—or approximately in two minutes or less.
 
In the age of social media, the trend has instead been to be able to write a pitch in 140 characters or less (which Twitter has now increased to 280 characters) in order to capture investor interest -- such as "we network networks” by Cisco Systems or “the entrepreneurs behind the entrepreneurs” from Sequoia.
 
The advent of new technology and the impact it has on modern business has made longer business proposals and initial contacts with potential investors using full-length business plans a thing of the past.
 
Venture capitalists (VCs) and executives who are forced to divvy up their limited time reading lengthy proposals may decide if a proposal warrants further reading by examining twit pitches for keywords.
 
This places more pressure on the person making the proposal, as he or she will have to explain a potentially complex topic in a small amount of space.
 A twit pitch is a variation of an elevator pitch, but with the constraint being the 280 character limit imposed by Twitter instead of the time spent in an elevator. 
Twitter, with its limitation on how many characters of text can be included in a tweet, has set a new kind of standard in condensing a pitch into a tiny amount of space, replacing the cursory elevator pitches which came before it.
 
Twit pitches are becoming a kind of art form in their own right, with some becoming known as 'company Haiku'. Below are some examples of successful Twit pitches:
