
Warren Buffett--the man, the myth, the legend in investing--has become quite a sought-after contact for the investing world. Whether for speaker events, seminars, or with simple questions, you'll be hard pressed to find Warren Buffett's email or house address personally. However, while Warren Buffett himself is very difficult to contact personally, it is possible to contact Berkshire Hathaway, the multinational conglomerate holding company with which he made his fortune.
 
Berkshire Hathaway has a public mailing address and email address that can be used to write to Buffett, although the communication will likely be read by one of his staffers and probably will not actually reach him. Buffett receives around 300 letters daily and does not personally read all of them.﻿﻿ 
 
Anyone can attempt to make contact with Buffet through Berkshire Hathaway's public email address, which is berkshire@berkshirehathaway.com. The company's general mailing address is 3555 Farnam St., Omaha, NE 68131. Buffett occasionally responds to unsolicited investment proposals, as long as they meet the standards Berkshire Hathaway has provided for investment inquiries.
 Warren Buffet may be contacted via his company, Berkshire Hathaway, or through his primary philanthropic interest, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
Warren Buffett has also pledged a significant amount of his wealth to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, so he may also be reached by contacting that organization. The foundation provides grant funding for a variety of non-profit causes, primarily dedicated to improving health and education across the globe.
 
Buffett has considerable influence with this organization and plans to donate to it from his estate upon his death. When contacting Warren Buffett through the foundation, address Buffett directly by name and send your correspondence to the organization.
 
Not every letter to the organization receives a response. Responses are more likely whenever the contact is relevant to the mission of the organization. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is interested in providing grants, and any correspondence reflecting a non-profit need is more likely to receive attention from this organization.
 Robert P Miles. "Warren Buffett Scholar and Berkshire Hathaway Authority." Accessed Aug. 19, 2020.