
The term tax deed refers to a legal document granting ownership of a property to a government body when the owner fails to pay any associated property taxes. A tax deed gives the government agency the authority to sell the property to collect the delinquent taxes. Once sold, the property is then transferred to the purchaser. These sales are called tax deed sales and are usually held at auctions.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
A property tax is any tax paid on a piece of property. Taxes are paid by the owners of real estate—individuals or corporate entities—and are assessed by the municipal government in which the property is located. The taxes collected are used to fund various municipal programs such as water and sewer improvements, law enforcement and fire service, education, road, and highway construction, public servants, and other services. Property tax rates vary by jurisdiction. When property taxes are left unpaid, the taxing authority may sell the property’s deed or title—and therefore, the property—to recover the outstanding taxes.
 A property deed transfers property ownership from the seller to a buyer. 
The taxing authority—usually a county government—must go through a series of legal steps in order to acquire a tax deed. These include notifying the property owner, applying for the tax deed, posting a notice at the property, and posting a public notice of sale. The exact steps that must be taken generally vary in accordance with local and municipal laws.
 
In a tax deed sale, the property itself is sold. The sale takes place through an auction, with a minimum bid of the amount of back taxes owed plus interest, as well as costs associated with selling the property. The highest bidder wins the property. The tax deed legally transfers ownership to the purchaser on one condition—the new owner must pay the entire amount owed within 48 to 72 hours, or the sale is canceled.
 
Any amount bid by the winning bidder in excess of the minimum bid may or may not be remitted to the delinquent owner. This depends on the jurisdiction. The original owner may forfeit this excess amount if they do not claim it within a specified period of time. For example, claims must be filed in California within one year, while the deadline in Texas is two years.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿ In Georgia, funds can be claimed up to five years after a tax deed sale, at which point a court order is required to retrieve excess funds.﻿﻿
 
While some states sell the title to the winning bidder the day of the tax deed sale auction, others will allow a redemption period during which the original owners have an opportunity to repay their tax debt and redeem the property. If the owner chooses to pay his debt obligations within this period, they must pay the winning bidder the amount bid at the auction plus interest, which can be pretty high. However, if the redemption period passes and the owner still does not reclaim his or her property deed, the highest bidder has a chance to foreclose on the property. For example, the redemption period in Idaho is 14 months, while owners in Iowa have one year and nine months to redeem their property.﻿﻿ ﻿﻿
 
Tax liens are very similar to tax deeds, but there are some subtle differences. While tax deeds transfer ownership of the property itself to a new party, tax liens are a legal claim against the property when the taxes aren't paid. Tax liens provide a relatively cheap investment for investors with a guaranteed return. Liens can cost anywhere from a few hundred to a few thousand dollars and pay simple interest that accrues on a monthly basis.
 
Here's how the process works. The government body places a lien against the property if the owner defaults on their property taxes. These liens, which prevent owners from doing anything with the property including refinancing or selling it, are sold off at auction rather than the property itself. Interested parties can invest in these tax liens by bidding for them. The return is based on a maximum rate of interest allowed by the municipality.
 
When a property owner defaults on their property, the municipality sends a notice advising them of the upcoming tax lien. If the owner doesn't bring the taxes up to date, the tax lien is then put up for auction. The lien is transferred to the highest bidder, who pays the outstanding tax amount to the municipality. In order to remove the lien, the property owner must pay the new lien owner the outstanding amount plus interest.
 
Let's assume the value of a property in a tax deed sale is assessed to be $100,000 and has $5,700 in back taxes. The highest bid on the property is $49,000. The county will take $5,700 from the bid amount to cover the property taxes due, and the remainder will be paid to the original owner, that is, $49,000 - $5,700 = $43,300. After all, the government authority is only interested in recovering the taxes owed to it. The bidder gets title of the home and an equity profit of $100,000 - $49,000 = $51,000
 Plumas County California. "FAQs - Tax Sale." Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Leon County, Clerk of the Circuit Court and Comptroller. "A Guide to Tax Deeds." Pages 1-2. Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. California State Controller. "County Tax Collectors' Reference Manual - Chapter 8000: Sale of Tax-Defaulted Property." Pages 52-53. Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Texas Constitution and Statutes. "Title 1. Property Tax Code. Subtitle E. Collections and Delinquency. Chapter 34. Tax Sales and Redemption. Subchapter A. Tax Sales." Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Justia. "O.C.G.A. 48-4-5 (2010) 48-4-5. Payment of excess." Accessed Feb. 17, 2020. Idaho Legislature. "Idaho Code Sec 63-1007. Redemption - Expiration of right." Accessed Feb. 17. 2020. Justia. "IA Code Sec 447.9 (2014): Notice of expiration of right of redemption - county right of redemption." Accessed Feb. 17, 2020.