
"There is no alternative," often abbreviated to "TINA," is a phrase that originated with the Victorian philosopher Herbert Spencer and became a slogan of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s. Today, it is often used by investors to explain a less-than-ideal portfolio allocation, usually of stocks, because other asset classes offer even worse returns. This situation and the subsequent decisions of investors can lead to the "Tina Effect" whereby stocks rise only because investors have no viable alternative.
 
Herbert Spencer, who lived from 1820 to 1903, was a British intellectual who strongly defended classical liberalism. He believed in laissez-faire government and positivism – the ability of technological and social progress to solve society's problems – and considered that Darwin's theory of "survival of the fittest" should apply to human interactions. To critics of capitalism, free markets and democracy, he frequently responded, "There is no alternative."
 
Margaret Thatcher, a Conservative, served as Britain's prime minister from 1979 to 1990. She used the phrase in a similar way to Spencer when responding to critics of her market-oriented policies of deregulation, political centralization, spending cuts and a rollback of the welfare state. Alternatives to this approach abounded, from the policies advocated by Labour to those in place in the Soviet Union. To Thatcher, however, free-market neoliberalism had no alternative.
 
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, American political scientist Francis Fukuyama argued that this view had been permanently vindicated. With communism discredited, he wrote that no ideology could ever seriously compete with capitalism and democracy again: the "end of history" that Marx promised had arrived, albeit in a different form.
 
A different use of The Tina Effect has been seen among investors in recent years, and the phrase now refers to a lack of satisfactory alternatives to an investment that is seen as questionable. For example, late in a bull market, investors might be concerned with the possibility of a reversal and be unwilling to allocate much of their portfolios to stocks.
 
On the other hand, if bonds offer low yields. and illiquid assets such as private equity or real estate are also unattractive, investors may hold stocks despite their concerns rather than revert to cash. If enough participants are of the same mind, the market can experience a "Tina Effect," rising gradually despite an apparent lack of drivers since there are no other options for capital increase.
