
Tax-exempt refers to income or transactions that are free from tax at the federal, state, or local level. The reporting of tax-free items may be on a taxpayer's individual or business tax return and shown for informational purposes only. The tax-exempt article is not part of any tax calculations.
 
Tax-exempt may also refer to the status of a business or organization which has limits on the amount of income or gifts which are taxable. These organizations include religious and charitable institutions.﻿﻿
 
Not to be confused with a tax deduction, tax-exempt frees the taxpayer of any tax obligation to submit taxes on the tax-free transaction or income. Whereas, the use of a tax deduction is to reduce the tax obligation by lowering gross income.
 
One common type of tax-exempt income is interest earned on municipal bonds, which are bonds issued by states and cities to raise funds for general operations or a specific project. When a taxpayer makes interest income on municipal bonds issued in their state of residence, the profit is exempt from both federal and state taxes.﻿﻿
 
 Taxpayers receive IRS Form 1099-INT for any investment interest they earn during the tax year. The reporting of tax-exempt interest is in box 8 of the 1099 form.﻿﻿ This informational only data are not included in the calculation of personal income taxes.﻿﻿
 
A taxpayer may buy an asset and subsequently sell that asset for a profit. The profit is a capital gain, which creates a taxable event. ﻿﻿ However, several types of capital gains are exempt from taxation. 
 
A taxpayer can offset capital gains with other capital losses for the tax year. For example, an investor with $5,000 in profits and $3,000 in losses pays taxes on only $2,000 in capital gains. The amount of capital losses a taxpayer may claim in a given year has a cap of $3,000. When capital losses exceed this cap, the excess may be carried forward to offset gains in future years.﻿﻿ 
 
The tax code also allows taxpayers to exclude from federal taxes a specific portion of capital gains from the sale of a home.﻿﻿
 
The alternative minimum tax (AMT) is an alternative method for determining tax liability. AMT adds back specific tax-exempt items into the personal tax calculation.﻿﻿ Interest from private activity bonds exempt from regular tax, for example, is added to the AMT tax calculation.﻿﻿ Individual taxpayers must include the AMT calculation with their original tax return and pay tax on the higher tax liability.﻿﻿
 
An exempt organization that has $1,000 or more of gross income from an unrelated business must file Form 990-T. An organization must pay estimated tax if it expects its tax for the year to be $500 or more.
 
A 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation is a charitable organization that the IRS recognizes as tax-exempt. This type of organization does not pay income tax on its earnings or on the donations it receives. Also, any taxpayer donations may reduce a taxpayer's taxable income by the donation amount.﻿﻿ This incentive encourages private charity and makes it easier for nonprofits to raise money.
 
A 501(c)(3) is a charitable organization involved in religious, charitable, educational, literary, preventing cruelty to animals and children, fostering amateur local and international sports competition, testing for public safety, and scientific activities or operations.﻿﻿ (For related reading, see "5 Groups That Don't Pay Taxes")
 Internal Revenue Service. "Exempt Organization Types." Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 550: Investment Income and Expenses (2018)," Page 11. Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 550: Investment Income and Expenses (2018)," Page 16. Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Topic No. 409: Capital Gains and Losses." Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 523: Selling Your Home," Page 2. Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Tax Topic No. 556: Alternative Minimum Tax." Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Form 6251 (2018)," Page 4. Accessed Dec. 11, 2019. Internal Revenue Service. "Publication 557: Tax-Exempt Status for Your Organization (2018)," Pages 21-22. Accessed Dec. 11, 2019.